CVS-TIMESTAMP: $Date$

I:sidney20011025122
T:Thou blind man's mark, thou fool's self-chosen snare
F:Thou blind man's mark, thou fool's self-chosen snare
N:Sammenlign denne med Shakespeares <A D=shakespeare0129>sonet nr. 129</A>
K:sonnet

Thou blind man's mark, thou fool's self-chosen snare, 
Fond fancy's scum, and dregs of scattered thought; 
Band of all evils, cradle of causeless care; 
Thou web of will, whose end is never wrought: 
Desire, Desire! I have too dearly bought, 
With price of mangled mind, thy worthless ware; 
Too long, too long, asleep thou hast me brought, 
Who shouldst my mind to higher things prepare, 
But yet in vain thou hast my ruin sought, 
In vain thou mad'st me to vain things aspire, 
In vain thou kindlest all thy smoky fire, 
For Virtue hath this better lesson taught: 
Within myself to seek my only hire, 
Desiring nought but how to kill Desire.

I:sidney20011025123
T:Leave me, O Love, which reachest but to dust
F:Leave me, O Love, which reachest but to dust
K:sonnet

Leave me, O Love, which reachest but to dust; 
And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things; 
Grow rich in that which never taketh rust; 
Whatever fades, but fading pleasure brings. 
Draw in thy beams, and humble all thy might 
To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be, 
Which breaks the clouds and opens forth the light, 
That doth both shine and give us light to see. 
O take fast hold; let that light be thy guide 
In this small course which birth draws out to death, 
And think how evil becometh him to slide 
Who seeketh heaven, and comes of heavenly breath. 
Then farewell, world; thy uttermost I see: 
Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me.

I:sidney20011025124
T:My true-love hath my heart and I have his
F:My true-love hath my heart and I have his
N:Fra <I>Arcadia</I>, en lang hyrde-roman af Sidney.
K:sonnet

My true-love hath my heart and I have his, 
By just exchange one for the other given: 
I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss; 
There never was a bargain better driven. 
His heart in me keeps me and him in one; 
My heart in him his thoughts and senses guides: 
He loves my heart, for once it was his own; 
I cherish his because in me it bides. 
His heart his wound received from my sight; 
My heart was wounded with his wounded heart; 
For as from me on him his hurt did light, 
So still, methought, in me his hurt did smart: 
Both equal hurt, in this change sought our bliss, 
My true love hath my heart and I have his.