CVS-TIMESTAMP: $Date$
VQ:korrektur1
I:donne2001062401
T:Song
F:Go and catch a falling star

Go and catch a falling star,
Get with child a mandrake root,
Tell me where all past years are,
Or who cleft the devil's foot,
Teach me to hear mermaid's singing,
Or to keep off envy's stinging,
And find
What wind
Serves to advance an honest mind.

If thou be'st born to strange sights,
Things invisible go see,
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
Till Age snow white hairs on thee;
Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me,
All strange wonders that befell thee,
And swear
No where
Lives a woman true, and fair.

If thou find'st one, let me know;
Such a pilgrimage were sweet.
Yet do not, I would not go,
Though at next door we might meet.
Though she were true when you met her,
And last till you write your letter,
Yet she
Will be
False, ere I come, to two or three.

I:donne2001062402
T:A Hymn to God the Father
F:Wilt thou forgive that sin where I begun

Wilt thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin, though it were done before?
Wilt thou forgive that sin through which I run,
And do run still, though still I do deplore?
When thou hast done, thou hast not done;
For I have more.

Wilt thou forgive that sin which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their door?
Wilt thou forgive that sin which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in a score?
When thou hast done, thou hast not done;
For I have more.

I have a sin of fear, that when I've spun
My last thread, I shall perish on the shore;
But swear by thyself that at my death thy Son
Shall shine as he shines now and heretofore;
And having done that, thou hast done;
I fear no more.


I:donne2001062403
T:Death, Be Not Proud
F:Death, be not proud, though some have called thee

Death, be not proud, though some have called thee
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so;
For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow,
Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill me.
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be,
Much pleasure; then from thee much more must flow,
And soonest our best men with thee do go,
Rest of their bones, and soul's delivery.
Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men,
And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell;
And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well
And better than thy stroke; why swell'st thou then?
One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
And death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die.

I:donne2001062404
T:Confined Love
F:Some man unworthy to be possessor

Some man unworthy to be possessor
Of old or new love, himself being false or weak,
Thought his pain and shame would be lesser,
If on womankind he might his anger wreak,
And thence a law did grow,
One should but one man know;
But are other creatures so?

Are sun, moon, or stars by law forbidden,
To smile where they list, or lend away their light?
Are birds divorced, or are they chidden
If they leave their mate, or lie abroad a-night?
Beasts do no jointures lose
Though they new lovers choose,
But we are made worse than those.

Who e'er rigged fair ship to lie in harbors
And not to seek new lands, or not to deal withal?
Or built fair houses, set trees, and arbours,
Only to lock up, or lese to let them fall?
Good is not good, unless
A thousand it possess,
But doth waste with greediness.

I:donne2001062405
T:The Dissolution
F:She's dead; and all which die

She's dead; and all which die
To their first elements resolve;
And we were mutual elements to us,
And made of one another.
My body then doth hers involve,
And those things whereof I consist hereby
In me abundant grow, and burdenous,
And nourish not, but smother.
My fire of passion, sighs of air,
Water of tears, and earthly sad despair,
Which my materials be,
But near worn out by love's security,
She, to my loss, doth by her death repair,
And I might live long wretched so
But that my fire doth with my fuel grow.
Now as those Active Kings
Whose foreign conquest treasure brings,
Receive more, and spend more, and soonest break:
This (which I am amazed that I can speak)
This death hath with my store
My use increased.
And so my soul more earnestly released
Will outstrip hers; as bullets flown before
A latter bullet may o'ertake, the powder being more.

I:donne2001062406
T:Oh my black soul! thou art now summoned
F:Oh my black soul! now art thou summoned

Oh my black soul! now art thou summoned 
By sickness, death's herald, and champion; 
Thou art like a pilgrim, which abroad hath done 
Treason, and durst not turn to whence he is fled; 
Or like a thief, which till death's doom be read, 
Wisheth himself delivered from prison, 
But damned and haled to execution, 
Wisheth that still he might be imprisoned. 
Yet grace, if thou repent, thou canst not lack; 
But who shall give thee that grace to begin? 
Oh make thy self with holy mourning black, 
And red with blushing, as thou art with sin; 
Or wash thee in Christ's blood, which hath this might 
That being red, it dyes red souls to white.

I:donne2001062407
T:Father, part of his double interest
F:Father, part of his double interest

Father, part of his double interest 
Unto thy kingdom, thy Son gives to me, 
His jointure in the knotty Trinity 
He keeps, and gives to me his death's conquest. 
This Lamb, whose death with life the world hath blest, 
Was from the world's beginning slain, and he 
Hath made two Wills which with the Legacy 
Of his and thy kingdom do thy Sons invest. 
Yet such are thy laws that men argue yet 
Whether a man those statutes can fulfil; 
None doth; but all-healing grace and spirit 
Revive again what law and letter kill. 
Thy law's abridgement, and thy last command 
Is all but love; Oh let this last Will stand!

I:donne2001062408
T:A Hymn to Christ at the Author's Last Going into Germany
F:In what torn ship soever I embark

In what torn ship soever I embark,
That ship shall be my emblem of thy Ark;
What sea soever swallow me, that flood
Shall be to me an emblem of thy blood;
Though thou with clouds of anger do disguise
Thy face, yet through that mask I know those eyes,
Which, though they turn away sometimes,
They never will despise.

I sacrifice this Island unto thee,
And all whom I loved there, and who loved me;
When I have put our seas 'twixt them and me,
Put thou thy sea betwixt my sins and thee.
As the tree's sap doth seek the root below
In winter, in my winter now I go,
Where none but thee, th' Eternal root
Of true Love, I may know.

Nor thou nor thy religion dost control
The amorousness of an harmonious Soul,
But thou wouldst have that love thyself: as thou
Art jealous, Lord, so I am jealous now,
Thou lov'st not, till from loving more, Thou free
My soul: who ever gives, takes liberty:
O, if thou car'st not whom I love
Alas, thou lov'st not me.

Seal then this bill of my Divorce to All,
On whom those fainter beams of love did fall;
Marry those loves, which in youth scattered be
On Fame, Wit, Hopes (false mistresses) to thee.
Churches are best for Prayer, that have least light:
To see God only, I go out of sight:
And to 'scape stormy days, I choose
An Everlasting night.

I:donne2002121501
T:No man is an Island, entire of it self
F:No man is an Island, entire of it self
N:Kendt fragment af et større digt.
N:Bidrag fra Lasse Rindom.

No man is an Island, entire of it self;
every man is a piece of the Continent,
a part of the main;
if a clod be washed away by the sea,
Europe is the less,
as well as if a promontory were, 
as well as if a manor of thy friends 
or of thine own were;
any mans death diminishes me,
because I am involved in Mankind;
And therefore never send to know
for whom the bell tolls;
it tolls for thee.

