VN:Udgivet posthumt af David Bates' søn Stockton Bates.

I:bates2001081401
T:Childhood
F:Childhood, sweet and sunny childhood
N:Kilde: <i>The Poetical Works of David Bates</i>, ed. Stockton Bates, Philadelphia, 1870, pp. 63-65
Q:korrektur1,kilde,side

Childhood, sweet and sunny childhood,
    With its careless, thoughtless air,
Like the verdant, tangled wildwood,
    Wants the training hand of care.

See it springing all around us --
    Glad to know, and quick to learn;
Asking questions that confound us;
    Teaching lessons in its turn.

Who loves not its joyous revel,
    Leaping lightly on the lawn,
Up the knoll, along the level,
    Free and graceful as a fawn?

Let it revel; it is nature
    Giving to the little dears
Strength of limb, and healthful features,
    For the toil of coming years.

He who checks a child with terror,
    Stops its play, and stills its song,
Not alone commits an error,
    But a great and moral wrong.

Give it play, and never fear it --
    Active life is no defect;
Never, never break its spirit --
    Curb it only to direct.

Would you dam the flowing river,
    Thinking it would cease to flow?
Onward it must go forever --
    Better teach it where to go.

Childhood is a fountain welling,
    Trace its channel in the sand,
And its currents, spreading, swelling,
    Will revive the withered land.

Childhood is the vernal season;
    Trim and train the tender shoot;
Love is to the coming reason,
    As the blossom to the fruit.

Tender twigs are bent and folded --
    Art to nature beauty lends;
Childhood easily is moulded;
    Manhood breaks, but seldom bends.

I:bates2001081402
T:Speak gently
F:Speak gently! -- It is better far
N:Kilde: <i>The Poetical Works of David Bates</i>, ed. Stockton Bates, Philadelphia, 1870, pp. 18-19.
Q:korrektur1,kilde,side
N:Parodieret af Lewis Carroll i <i>Alice's Adventures in Wonderland</i>: »Speak roughly to your little boy«.

Speak gently! -- It is better far
    To rule by love, than fear --
Speak gently -- let not harsh words mar
    The good we might do here!

Speak gently! -- Love doth whisper low
    The vows that true hearts bind;
And gently Friendship's accents flow;
    Affection's voice is kind.

Speak gently to the little child!
    Its love be sure to gain;
Teach it in accents soft and mild: --
    It may not long remain.

Speak gently to the young, for they
    Will have enough to bear --
Pass through this life as best they may,
    'T is full of anxious care!

Speak gently to the aged one,
    Grieve not the care-worn heart;
The sands of life are nearly run,
    Let such in peace depart!

Speak gently, kindly, to the poor;
    Let no harsh tone be heard;
They have enough they must endure,
    Without an unkind word!

Speak gently to the erring -- know,
    They may have toiled in vain;
Perchance unkindness made them so;
    Oh, win them back again!

Speak gently! -- He who gave his life
    To bend man's stubborn will,
When elements were in fierce strife,
    Said to them, "Peace, be still."

Speak gently! -- 't is a little thing
    Dropped in the heart's deep well;
The good, the joy, which it may bring,
    Eternity shall tell.


I:bates2001081403
T:Chiding
F:Reproach will seldom mend the young
N:Kilde: <i>The Poetical Works of David Bates</i>, ed. Stockton Bates, Philadelphia, 1870, p. 8.
Q:korrektur1,kilde,side

Reproach will seldom mend the young,
    If they are left to need it;
The breath of love must stir the tongue,
    If you would have them heed it.

How oft we see a child caressed
    For little faults and failings,
Which should have been at first suppressed
    To save the after railings!

If, when the heart would go astray,
    You would the passion smother,
You must not tear the charm away,
    But substitute another.

Thus it is pleasant to be led,
    If he who leads will measure
The heart's affection by the head,
    And make pursuit a pleasure.


