CVS-TIMESTAMP: $Date$

VQ:korrektur1,korrektur2,kilde
VU:Contayning certayne Sonnets: with the complaint of Rosamund
VN:Teksten følger <I>Poems and A Defence of Ryme</I>, red. Arthur Colby Sprague, Routledge & Kegan Paul 1950.
VN:Bidrag fra Brian Bentsen. 
VP:1592-p1.jpg%Facsimile af titelblad.

I:daniel2002020653
T:To The Right Honourable the Ladie <I>Mary</I>, Countesse of Pembroke
TYPE:prosa

<i>Right honorable, although I rather desired to keep in the priuate passions of my youth, from the multitude, as things vtterd to my selfe, and consecrated to silence: yet seeing I was betraide by the indiscretion of a greedie Printer, and had some of my secrets bewraide to the world, vncorrected: doubting the like of the rest, I am forced to publish that which I neuer ment. But this wrong was not onely doone to mee, but to him whose vnmatchable lines haue indured the like misfortune; Ignorance sparing not to commit sacriledge vpon so holy Reliques. Yet</i> Astrophel,<i> flying with the wings of his own fame, a higher pitch then the gross-sighted can discerne, hath registred his owne name in the Annals of eternitie, and cannot be disgraced, howsoeuer disguised. And for my selfe, seeing I am thrust out into the worlde, and that my vnboldned Muse, is forced to appeare so rawly in publique; I desire onely to bee graced by the countenance of your protection: whome the fortune of our time hath made the happie and iudiciall Patronesse of the Muses, (a glory hereditary to your house) to preserue them from those hidious Beastes, Obliuion, and Barbarisme. Whereby you doe not onely possesse the honour of the present, but also do bind posterity to an euer gratefull memorie of your vertues, wherein you must suruiue your selfe. And if my lines heereafter better laboured, shall purchase grace in the world, they must remaine the monuments of your honourable fauour, and recorde the zealous duetie of mee, who am vowed to your honour in all obseruancy for euer,</i>

                   Samuel Danyell.

H1:To Delia

I:daniel2002020601
T:Sonnet I
K:sonnet
TI:Vnto the boundles Ocean of thy beautie
TOC:Sonnet I (Vnto the boundles Ocean of thy beautie)
F:Vnto the boundles Ocean of thy beautie

    Vnto the boundles Ocean of thy beautie
Runs this poore riuer, charg'd with streames of zeale:
Returning thee the tribute of my dutie,
Which heere my loue, my youth, my playnts reueale.
    Heere I vnclaspe the booke of my charg'd soule,
Where I haue cast th'accounts of all my care:
Heere haue I summ'd my sighes, heere I enroule
Howe they were spent for thee; Looke what they are.
    Looke on the deere expences of my youth,
And see how iust I reckon with thyne eyes:
Examine well thy beautie with my trueth,
And crosse my cares ere greater summes arise.
        Reade it sweet maide, though it be doone but slightly;
        Who can shewe all his loue, doth loue but lightly.

I:daniel2002020602
T:Sonnet II
K:sonnet
TI:Goe wailing verse, the infants of my loue
TOC:Sonnet II (Goe wailing verse, the infants of my loue)
F:Goe wailing verse, the infants of my loue

    Goe wailing verse, the infants of my loue,
<i>Minerua</i>-like, brought foorth without a Mother:
Present the image of the cares I proue,
Witnes your Fathers griefe exceedes all other.
    Sigh out a story of her cruell deedes,
With interrupted accents of dispayre:
A Monument that whosoeuer reedes,
May iustly praise, and blame my loueles Faire.
    Say her disdaine hath dryed vp my blood,
And starued you, in succours still denying:
Presse to her eyes, importune me some good;
Waken her sleeping pittie with your crying.
        Knock at that hard hart, beg till you haue moou'd her;
        And tell th'vnkind, how deerely I haue lou'd her.

I:daniel2002020603
T:Sonnet III
K:sonnet
TI:If so it hap this of-spring of my care
TOC:Sonnet III (If so it hap this of-spring of my care)
F:If so it hap this of-spring of my care

    If so it hap this of-spring of my care,
These fatall Antheames, sad and mornefull Songes:
Come to their view, who like afflicted are;
Let them yet sigh their owne, and mone my wrongs.
    But vntouch'd harts, with vnaffected eye,
Approch not to behold so great distresse:
Cleer-sighted you, soone note what is awry,
Whilst blinded ones mine errours neuer gesse.
    You blinded soules whom youth and errours lead,
You outcast Eglets, dazled with your sunne:
Ah you, and none but you my sorrowes read,
You best can iudge the wrongs that she hath dunne.
        That she hath doone, the motiue of my paine;
        Who whilst I loue, doth kill me with disdaine.

I:daniel2002020604
T:Sonnet IIII
K:sonnet
TI:These plaintiue verse, the Posts of my desire
TOC:Sonnet IIII (These plaintiue verse, the Posts of my desire)
F:These plaintiue verse, the Posts of my desire

    These plaintiue verse, the Posts of my desire,
Which haste for succour to her slowe regarde:
Beare not report of any slender fire,
Forging a griefe to winne a fames rewarde.
    Nor are my passions limnd for outward hewe,
For that no collours can depaynt my sorrowes:
<i>Delia</i> her selfe, and all the world may viewe
Best in my face, how cares hath til'd deepe forrowes.
    No Bayes I seeke to deck my mourning brow,
O cleer-eyed Rector of the holie Hill:
My humble accents craue the Olyue bow,
Of her milde pittie and relenting will.
        These lines I vse, t'unburthen mine owne hart;
        My loue affects no fame, nor steemes of art.

I:daniel2002020605
T:Sonnet V
K:sonnet
TI:Whilst youth and error led my wandring minde
TOC:Sonnet V (Whilst youth and error led my wandring minde)
F:Whilst youth and error led my wandring minde

    Whilst youth and error led my wandring minde,
And set my thoughts in heedeles waies to range:
All vnawares a Goddesse chaste I finde,
<i>Diana</i>-like, to worke my suddaine change.
    For her no sooner had my view bewrayd,
But with disdaine to see me in that place:
With fairest hand, the sweet vnkindest maide,
Castes water-cold disdaine vpon my face.
    Which turn'd my sport into a Harts dispaire,
Which still is chac'd, whilst I haue any breath,
By mine owne thoughts: set on me by my faire,
My thoughts like houndes, pursue me to my death.
        Those that I fostred of mine owne accord,
        Are made by her to murther thus their Lord.

I:daniel2002020606
T:Sonnet VI
K:sonnet
TI:Faire is my loue, and cruell as sh'is faire
TOC:Sonnet VI (Faire is my loue, and cruell as sh'is faire)
F:Faire is my loue, and cruell as sh'is faire

    Faire is my loue, and cruell as sh'is faire;
Her brow shades frownes, although her eyes are sunny;
Her Smiles are lightning, though her pride dispaire;
And her disdaines are gall; her fauours hunny.
    A modest maide, deckt with a blush of honour,
Whose feete doe treade greene pathes of youth and loue,
The wonder of all eyes that looke vppon her:
Sacred on earth, design'd a Saint aboue.
    Chastitie and Beautie, which were deadly foes,
Liue reconciled friends within her brow:
And had she pittie to conioine with those,
Then who had heard the plaints I vtter now.
        O had she not beene faire, and thus vnkinde,
        My Muse had slept, and none had knowne my minde.

I:daniel2002020607
T:Sonnet VII
K:sonnet
TI:O had she not beene faire and thus vnkinde
TOC:Sonnet VII (O had she not beene faire and thus vnkinde)
F:O had she not beene faire and thus vnkinde

    O had she not beene faire and thus vnkinde,
Then had no finger pointed at my lightnes:
The world had neuer knowne what I doe finde,
And Clowdes obscure had shaded still her brightnes.
    Then had no Censors eye these lines suruaide,
Nor grauer browes haue iudg'd my Muse so vaine;
No sunne my blush and errour had bewraide,
Nor yet the world had heard of such disdaine.
    Then had I walkt with bold erected face,
No down-cast looke had signified my mis:
But my degraded hopes, with such disgrace
Did force me grone out griefes, and vtter this.
        For being full, should not I then haue spoken:
        My sence oppres'd, had fail'd; and hart had broken.

I:daniel2002020608
T:Sonnet VIII
K:sonnet
TI:Thou poore hart sacrifiz'd vnto the fairest
TOC:Sonnet VIII (Thou poore hart sacrifiz'd vnto the fairest)
F:Thou poore hart sacrifiz'd vnto the fairest

    Thou poore hart sacrifiz'd vnto the fairest,
Hast sent the incens of thy sighes to heauen:
And still against her frownes fresh vowes repayrest,
And made thy passions with her beautie euen.
    And you mine eyes the agents of my hart,
Told the dumbe message of my hidden griefe:
And oft with carefull turnes, with silent art,
Did treate the cruell Fayre to yeelde reliefe.
    And you my verse, the Aduocates of loue,
Haue followed hard the processe of my case:
And vrg'd that title which dooth plainely proue,
My faith should win, if iustice might haue place.
        Yet though I see, that nought we doe can moue her,
        Tis not disdaine must make me leaue to loue her.

I:daniel2002020609
T:Sonnet IX
K:sonnet
TI:If this be loue, to drawe a weary breath
TOC:Sonnet IX (If this be loue, to drawe a weary breath)
F:If this be loue, to drawe a weary breath

    If this be loue, to drawe a weary breath,
Painte on flowdes, till the shore, crye to th'ayre:
With downward lookes, still reading on the earth;
The sad memorials of my loues despaire.
    If this be loue, to warre against my soule,
Lye downe to waile, rise vp to sigh and grieue me:
The neuer-resting stone of care to roule,
Still to complaine my greifes, and none releiue me.
    If this be loue, to cloath me with darke thoughts,
Haunting vntroden pathes to waile apart;
My pleasures horror, Musique tragicke notes,
Teares in my eyes, and sorrowe at my hart.
        If this be loue, to liue a liuing death;
        O then loue I, and drawe this weary breath.

I:daniel2002020610
T:Sonnet X
K:sonnet
TI:O then I loue, and drawe this weary breath
TOC:Sonnet X (O then I loue, and drawe this weary breath)
F:O then I loue, and drawe this weary breath

    O then I loue, and drawe this weary breath,
For her the cruell faire, within whose brow
I written finde the sentence of my death,
In vnkinde letters; wrought she cares not how.
    O thou that rul'st the confines of the night,
Laughter-louing Goddesse, worldly pleasures Queene,
Intenerat that hart that sets so light,
The truest loue that euer yet was seene.
    And cause her leaue to triumph in this wise,
Vppon the prostrate spoyle of that poore harte:
That serues a trophey to her conquering eyes,
And must their glorie to the world imparte.
        Once let her know, sh'hath done enough to proue me;
        And let her pittie if she cannot loue me.

I:daniel2002020611
T:Sonnet XI
K:sonnet
TI:Teares, vowes, and prayers win the hardest hart
TOC:Sonnet XI (Teares, vowes, and prayers win the hardest hart)
F:Teares, vowes, and prayers win the hardest hart

    Teares, vowes, and prayers win the hardest hart:
Teares, vowes, and prayers haue I spent in vaine;
Teares, cannot soften flint, nor vowes conuart,
Prayers preuaile not with a quaint disdaine.
    I lose my teares, where I haue lost my loue,
I vowe my faith, where faith is not regarded;
I pray in vaine, a merciles to moue:
So rare a faith ought better be rewarded.
    Yet though I cannot win her will with teares,
Though my soules Idoll scorneth all my vowes;
Though all my prayers be to so deafe eares:
No fauour though the cruell faire allowes.
        Yet will I weepe, vowe, pray to cruell Shee;
        Flint, Frost, Disdaine, weares, melts, and yeelds we see.

I:daniel2002020612
T:Sonnet XII
K:sonnet
TI:My spotles loue hoouers with white wings
TOC:Sonnet XII (My spotles loue hoouers with white wings)
F:My spotles loue hoouers with white wings

    My spotles loue hoouers with white wings,
About the temple of the proudest frame:
Where blaze those lights fayrest of earthly things,
Which cleere our clouded world with brightest flame.
    M'ambitious thoughts confined in her face,
Affect no honour, but what she can giue mee:
My hopes doe rest in limits of her grace,
I weygh no comfort vnlesse she releeue mee.
    For she that can my hart imparadize,
Holdes in her fairest hand what deerest is:
My fortunes wheele, the circle of her eyes,
Whose rowling grace deigne once a turne of blis.
        All my liues sweete consists in her alone,
        So much I loue the most vnlouing one.

I:daniel2002020613
T:Sonnet XIII
K:sonnet
TI:Behold what happe <i>Pigmaleon</i> had to frame
TOC:Sonnet XIII (Behold what happe <i>Pigmaleon</i> had to frame)
F:Behold what happe Pigmaleon had to frame

    Behold what happe <i>Pigmaleon</i> had to frame,
And carue his proper griefe vpon a stone:
My heauie fortune is much like the same,
I worke on Flint, and that's the cause I mone.
    For haples loe euen with mine owne desires,
I figured on the table of my harte,
The fayrest forme, the worldes eye admires,
And so did perish by my proper arte.
    And still I toile, to chaunge the marble brest
Of her, whose sweetest grace I doe adore:
Yet cannot finde her breathe vnto my rest,
Hard is her hart and woe is me therefore.
        O happie he that ioy'd his stone and arte,
        Vnhappy I to loue a stony harte.

I:daniel2002020614
T:Sonnet XIIII
K:sonnet
TI:Those amber locks, are those same nets my deere
TOC:Sonnet XIIII (Those amber locks, are those same nets my deere)
F:Those amber locks, are those same nets my deere

    Those amber locks, are those same nets my deere,
Wherewith my libertie thou didst surprize:
Loue was the flame, that fired me so neere,
The darte transpearsing, were those Christall eyes.
    Strong is the net, and feruent is the flame;
Deepe is the wounde, my sighes do well report:
Yet doe I loue, adore, and praise the same,
That holdes, that burnes, that wounds me in this sort.
    And list not seeke to breake, to quench, to heale,
The bonde, the flame, the wound that festreth so;
By knife, by lyquor, or by salue to deale:
So much I please to perish in my wo.
        Yet least long trauailes be aboue my strength,
        Good <i>Delia</i> lose, quench, heale me now at length.

I:daniel2002020615
T:Sonnet XV
K:sonnet
TI:If that a loyall hart and faith vnfained
TOC:Sonnet XV (If that a loyall hart and faith vnfained)
F:If that a loyall hart and faith vnfained

    If that a loyall hart and faith vnfained,
If a sweete languish with a chast desire:
If hunger-staruen thoughts so long retayned,
Fed but with smoake, and cherisht but with fire.
    And if a brow with cares caracters painted,
Bewraies my loue, with broken words halfe spoken,
To her that sits in my thoughts Temple sainted,
And layes to view my Vultur-gnawne hart open.
    If I haue doone due homage to her eyes,
And had my sighes styll tending on her name:
If on her loue my life and honour lyes;
And she th'vnkindest maide still scornes the same.
        Let this suffice, the world yet may see;
        The fault is hers, though mine the hurt must bee.

I:daniel2002020616
T:Sonnet XVI
K:sonnet
TI:Happie in sleepe, waking content to languish
TOC:Sonnet XVI (Happie in sleepe, waking content to languish)
F:Happie in sleepe, waking content to languish

    Happie in sleepe, waking content to languish,
Imbracing cloudes by night, in day time morne:
All things I loath saue her and mine owne anguish,
Pleas'd in my hurt, inur'd to liue forlorne.
    Nought doe I craue, but loue, death, or my Lady,
Hoarce with crying mercy, mercy yet my merit;
So many vowes and prayers euer made I,
That now at length t'yeelde, meere pittie were it.
    But still the <i>Hydra</i> of my cares renuing,
Reuiues new sorrowes of her fresh disdayning;
Still must I goe the Summer windes pursuing:
Finding no ende nor Period of my payning.
        Waile all my life, my griefes do touch so neerely,
        And thus I liue, because I loue her deerely.

I:daniel2002020617
T:Sonnet XVII
K:sonnet
TI:Since the first looke that led me to this error
TOC:Sonnet XVII (Since the first looke that led me to this error)
F:Since the first looke that led me to this error

    Since the first looke that led me to this error,
To this thoughts-maze, to my confusion tending:
Still haue I liu'd in griefe, in hope, in terror,
The circle of my sorrowes neuer ending.
    Yet cannot leaue her loue that holdes me hatefull,
Her eyes exact it, though her hart disdaines mee:
See what reward he hath that serues th'vngratefull,
So true and loyall loue no fauours gaines mee.
    Still must I whet my younge desires abated,
Vppon the Flint of such a hart rebelling;
And all in vaine, her pride is so innated,
She yeeldes no place at all for pitties dwelling.
        Oft haue I tolde her that my soule did loue her,
        And that with teares, yet all this will not moue her.

I:daniel2002020618
T:Sonnet XVIII
K:sonnet
TI:Restore thy tresses to the golden Ore
TOC:Sonnet XVIII (Restore thy tresses to the golden Ore)
F:Restore thy tresses to the golden Ore

    Restore thy tresses to the golden Ore,
Yeelde <i>Cithereas</i> sonne those Arkes of loue;
Bequeath the heauens the starres that I adore,
And to th'Orient do thy Pearles remoue.
    Yeelde thy hands pride vnto th'yuory whight,
T'<i>Arabian</i> odors giue thy breathing sweete:
Restore thy blush vnto <i>Aurora</i> bright,
To <i>Thetis</i> giue the honour of thy feete.
    Let <i>Venus</i> haue thy graces, her resign'd,
And thy sweete voyce giue backe vnto the Spheares:
But yet restore thy fearce and cruell minde,
To <i>Hyrcan</i> Tygers, and to ruthles Beares.
        Yeelde to the Marble thy hard hart againe;
        So shalt thou cease to plague, and I to paine.

I:daniel2002020619
T:Sonnet XIX
K:sonnet
TI:If Beautie thus be clouded with a frowne
TOC:Sonnet XIX (If Beautie thus be clouded with a frowne)
F:If Beautie thus be clouded with a frowne

    If Beautie thus be clouded with a frowne,
That pittie shines no comfort to my blis:
And vapors of disdaine so ouergrowne,
That my liues light thus wholy darkned is.
    Why should I more molest the world with cryes?
The ayre with sighes, the earth belowe with teares?
Since I liue hatefull to those ruthlesse eyes,
Vexing with vntun'd moane, her daintie eares.
    If I haue lou'd her deerer then my breath,
My breath that calls the heauens to witnes it:
And still must holde her deere till after death.
And if that all this cannot moue a whit;
        Yet let her say that she hath doone me wrong,
        To vse me thus and knowe I lou'd so long.

I:daniel2002020620
T:Sonnet XX
K:sonnet
TI:Come death the Anchor-holde of all my thoughtes
TOC:Sonnet XX (Come death the Anchor-holde of all my thoughtes)
F:Come death the Anchor-holde of all my thoughtes

    Come death the Anchor-holde of all my thoughtes,
My last Resort whereto my soule appealeth;
For all too long on earth my fancy dotes,
Whilst my best blood my younge desiers sealeth.
    That hart is now the prospectiue of horror,
That honored hath the cruelst faire that lyueth:
The cruelst faire, that sees I languish for her,
Yet neuer mercy to my merit giueth.
    This is her Lawrell and her triumphes prize,
To tread me downe with foote of her disgrace:
Whilst I did builde my fortune in her eyes,
And laide my liues rest on so faire a face;
        That rest I lost, my loue, my life and all,
        So high attempts to lowe disgraces fall.

I:daniel2002020621
T:Sonnet XXI
K:sonnet
TI:These sorrowing sighes, the smaokes of mine annoy
TOC:Sonnet XXI (These sorrowing sighes, the smaokes of mine annoy)
F:These sorrowing sighes, the smaokes of mine annoy

    These sorrowing sighes, the smaokes of mine annoy;
These teares, which heate of sacred flame distils;
Are these due tributes that my faith dooth pay
Vnto the tyrant; whose vnkindnes kils.
    I sacrifize my youth, and blooming yeares,
At her proud feete, and she respects not it:
My flowre vntimely's withred with my teares,
And winter woes, for spring of youth vnfit.
    She thinkes a looke may recompence my care,
And so with lookes prolongs my long-lookt ease:
As short that blisse, so is the comfort rare,
Yet must that blisse my hungry thoughts appease.
        Thus she returnes my hopes so fruitlesse euer,
        Once let her loue indeede, or eye me neuer.

I:daniel2002020622
T:Sonnet XXII
K:sonnet
TI:False hope prolongs my euer certaine griefe
TOC:Sonnet XXII (False hope prolongs my euer certaine griefe)
F:False hope prolongs my euer certaine griefe

    False hope prolongs my euer certaine griefe;
Traytrous to me and faithfull to my loue:
A thousand times it promis'd me reliefe,
Yet neuer any true effect I proue.
    Oft when I finde in her no trueth at all,
I banish her, and blame her trechery:
Yet soone againe I must her backe recall,
As one that dyes without her company.
    Thus often as I chase my hope from mee,
Straight way she hates her vnto <i>Delias</i> eyes:
Fed with some pleasing looke there shall she bee,
And so sent backe and thus my fortune lyes.
        Lookes feede my Hope, Hope fosters me in vaine;
        Hopes are vnsure, when certaine is my paine.

I:daniel2002020623
T:Sonnet XXIII
K:sonnet
TI:Looke in my griefes, and blame me not to morne
TOC:Sonnet XXIII (Looke in my griefes, and blame me not to morne)
F:Looke in my griefes, and blame me not to morne

    Looke in my griefes, and blame me not to morne,
From care to care that leades a life so bad;
Th'Orphan of fortune, borne to be her scorne,
Whose clouded brow dooth make my daies so sad.
    Long are their nights whose cares doe neuer sleepe
Loathsome their daies, whome no sunne euer ioyde:
Her fairest eyes doe penetrate so deepe,
That thus I liue booth day and night annoyde.
    But since the sweetest roote doth yeeld thus much,
Her praise from my complaint I may not part:
I loue th'effect for that the cause is such,
Ile praise her face, and blame her flintie hart.
        Whilst that wee make the world admire at vs,
        Her for disdaine, and me for louing thus.

I:daniel2002020624
T:Sonnet XXIIII
K:sonnet
TI:Oft and in vaine my rebel thoughts haue ventred
TOC:Sonnet XXIIII (Oft and in vaine my rebel thoughts haue ventred)
F:Oft and in vaine my rebel thoughts haue ventred

    Oft and in vaine my rebel thoughts haue ventred,
To stop the passage of my vanquisht hart:
And shut those waies my friendly foe first entred,
Hoping thereby to free my better part.
    And whilst I garde these windowes of this forte,
Where my harts theefe to vexe me made her choice:
And thether all my forces doe transporte,
An other passage opens at her voice.
    Her voyce betraies me to her hand and eye:
My freedomes tyrants conquering all by arte:
But ah, what glorie can she get thereby,
With three such powers to plague one silly harte.
        Yet my soules soueraigne, since I must resigne;
        Reigne in my thoughts, my loue and life are thine.

I:daniel2002020625
T:Sonnet XXV
K:sonnet
TI:Raigne in my thoughts faire hand, sweete eye, rare voyce
TOC:Sonnet XXV (Raigne in my thoughts faire hand, sweete eye, rare voyce)
F:Raigne in my thoughts faire hand, sweete eye, rare voyce

    Raigne in my thoughts faire hand, sweete eye, rare voyce,
Possesse me whole, my harts triumuirat:
Yet heauie hart to make so hard a choise,
Of such as spoile thy poore afflicted state,
    For whilst they striue which shall be Lord of all,
All my poore life by them is troden downe:
They all erect their Trophies on my fall,
And yeelde me nought that giues them their renowne.
    When backe I looke, I sigh my freedome past,
And waile the state wherein I present stande:
And see my fortune euer like to last,
Finding me rain'd with such a heauie hande;
        What can I doo but yeeld, and yeeld I doo,
        And serue all three, and yet they spoile me too.

I:daniel2002020626
T:Sonnet XXVI
K:sonnet
TI:Whilst by her eyes pursu'd, my poore hart flew it
TOC:Sonnet XXVI (Whilst by her eyes pursu'd, my poore hart flew it)
F:Whilst by her eyes pursu'd, my poore hart flew it

    Whilst by her eyes pursu'd, my poore hart flew it,
Into the sacred bosome of my deerest:
She there in that sweete sanctuary slew it,
Where it presum'd his safetie to be neerest.
    My priuiledge of faith could not protect it,
That was with blood and three yeeres witnes signed:
In all which time she neuer could suspect it,
For well she sawe my loue, and how I pined.
    And yet no comfort would her brow reueale mee,
No lightning looke, which falling hopes erecteth:
What bootes to lawes of succour to appeale mee?
Ladies and tyrants, neuer lawes respecteth.
        Then there I dye, where hop'd I to haue liuen;
        And by that hand, which better might haue giuen.

I:daniel2002020627
T:Sonnet XXVII
K:sonnet
TI:The starre of my mishappe impos'd this payning
TOC:Sonnet XXVII (The starre of my mishappe impos'd this payning)
F:The starre of my mishappe impos'd this payning

    The starre of my mishappe impos'd this payning,
To spend the Aprill of my yeers in wayling,
That neuer found my fortune but in wayning,
With still fresh cares my present woes assayling.
    Yet her I blame not, though she might haue blest mee,
But my desires wings so high aspiring:
Now melted with the sunne that hath possest mee,
Downe doe I fall from off my high desiring;
    And in my fall doe cry for mercy speedy,
No pittying eye lookes backe vppon my mourning:
No helpe I finde when now most fauour neede I,
Th'Ocean of my teares must drowne me burning,
        And this my death shall christen her anew,
        And giue the cruell Faire her tytle dew.

I:daniel2002020628
T:Sonnet XXVIII
K:sonnet
TI:Raysing my hopes on hills of high desire
TOC:Sonnet XXVIII (Raysing my hopes on hills of high desire)
F:Raysing my hopes on hills of high desire

    Raysing my hopes on hills of high desire,
Thinking to skale the heauen of her hart:
My slender meanes presum'd too high a part;
Her thunder of disdaine forst me retire;
    And threw mee downe to paine in all this fire,
Where loe I languish in so heauie smart,
Because th'attempt was farre aboue my arte:
Her pride brook'd not poore soules shold come so nye her.
    Yet I protest my high aspyring will,
Was not to dispossesse her of her right:
Her soueraignty should haue remayned still,
I onely sought the blisse to haue her sight.
        Her sight contented thus to see me spill,
        Fram'd my desires fit for her eyes to kill.

I:daniel2002020629
T:Sonnet XXIX
K:sonnet
TI:O why dooth <I>Delia</I> credite so her glasse
TOC:Sonnet XXIX (O why dooth <I>Delia</I> credite so her glasse)
F:O why dooth <I>Delia</I> credite so her glasse

    O why dooth <i>Delia</i> credite so her glasse,
Gazing her beautie deign'd her by the skyes:
And dooth not rather looke on him (alas)
Whose state best shewes the force of murthering eyes.
    The broken toppes of loftie trees declare,
The fury of a mercy-wanting storme:
And of what force your wounding graces are,
Vppon my selfe you best may finde the forme.
    Then leaue your glasse, and gaze your selfe on mee,
That Mirrour shewes what powre is in your face:
To viewe your forme too much, may daunger bee,
<i>Narcissus</i> chaung'd t'a flowre in such a case.
        And you are chaung'd, but not t'a Hiacint;
        I feare your eye hath turn'd your hart to flint.

I:daniel2002020630
T:Sonnet XXX
K:sonnet
TI:I once may see when yeeres shall wrecke my wronge
TOC:Sonnet XXX (I once may see when yeeres shall wrecke my wronge)
F:I once may see when yeeres shall wrecke my wronge

    I once may see when yeeres shall wrecke my wronge,
When golden haires shall chaunge to siluer wyer:
And those bright rayes, that kindle all this fyer
Shall faile in force, their working not so stronge.
    Then beautie, now the burthen of my song,
Whose glorious blaze the world dooth so admire;
Must yeelde vp all to tyrant Times desire:
Then fade those flowres which deckt her pride so long.
    When if she grieue to gaze her in her glas,
Which then presents her winter-withered hew;
Goe you my verse, goe tell her what she was;
For what she was she best shall finde in you.
        Your firie heate lets not her glorie passe,
        But Phenix-like shall make her liue anew.

I:daniel2002020631
T:Sonnet XXXI
K:sonnet
TI:Looke <I>Delia</I> how wee steeme the half-blowne Rose
TOC:Sonnet XXXI (Looke <I>Delia</I> how wee steeme the half-blowne Rose)
F:Looke <I>Delia</I> how wee steeme the half-blowne Rose

    Looke <i>Delia</i> how wee steeme the half-blowne Rose,
The image of thy blush and Summers honor:
Whilst in her tender greene she doth inclose
That pure sweete beautie, Time bestowes vppon her.
    No sooner spreades her glorie in the ayre,
But straight her ful-blowne pride is in declyning;
She then is scorn'd that late adorn'd the fayre:
So clowdes thy beautie, after fayrest shining.
    No Aprill can reuiue thy withred flowers,
Whose blooming grace adornes thy glorie now:
Swift speedy Time, feathred with flying howers,
Dissolues the beautie of the fairest brow.
        O let not then such riches waste in vaine;
        But loue whilst that thou maist be lou'd againe.

I:daniel2002020632
T:Sonnet XXXII
K:sonnet
TI:But loue whilst that thou maist be lou'd againe
TOC:Sonnet XXXII (But loue whilst that thou maist be lou'd againe)
F:But loue whilst that thou maist be lou'd againe

    But loue whilst that thou maist be lou'd againe,
Now whilst thy May hath fill'd thy lappe with flowers;
Now whilst thy beautie beares without a staine;
Now vse thy Summer smiles ere winter lowres.
    And whilst thou spread'st vnto the rysing sunne,
The fairest flowre that euer sawe the light:
Now ioye thy time before thy sweete be dunne,
And <i>Delia</i>, thinke thy morning must haue night.
    And that thy brightnes sets at length to west:
When thou wilt close vp that which now thou showest:
And thinke the same becomes thy fading best,
Which then shall hide it most, and couer lowest.
        Men doe not weigh the stalke for that it was,
        When once they finde her flowre, her glory passe.

I:daniel2002020633
T:Sonnet XXXIII
K:sonnet
TI:When men shall finde thy flowre, thy glory passe
TOC:Sonnet XXXIII (When men shall finde thy flowre, thy glory passe)
F:When men shall finde thy flowre, thy glory passe

    When men shall finde thy flowre, thy glory passe,
And thou with carefull brow sitting alone:
Receiued hast this message from thy glasse,
That tells thee trueth, and saies that all is gone.
    Fresh shalt thou see in mee the woundes thou madest,
Though spent thy flame, in mee the heate remayning:
I that haue lou'd thee thus before thou fadest,
My faith shall waxe, when thou art in thy wayning.
    The world shall finde this miracle in mee,
That fire can burne, when all the matter's spent:
Then what my faith hath beene thy selfe shalt see,
And that thou wast vnkinde thou maiest repent.
        Thou maist repent, that thou hast scorn'd my teares,
        When Winter snowes vppon thy golden heares.

I:daniel2002020634
T:Sonnet XXXIIII
K:sonnet
TI:When Winter snowes vpon thy golden heares
TOC:Sonnet XXXIIII (When Winter snowes vpon thy golden heares)
F:When Winter snowes vpon thy golden heares

    When Winter snowes vpon thy golden heares,
And frost of age hath nipt thy flowers neere:
When darke shall seeme thy day that neuer cleares,
And all lyes withred that was held so deere.
    Then take this picture which I heere present thee,
Limned with a Pensill not all vnworthy:
Heere see the giftes that God and nature lent thee;
Heere read thy selfe, and what I suffred for thee.
    This may remaine thy lasting monument,
Which happily posteritie may cherish:
These collours with thy fading are not spent;
These may remaine, when thou and I shall perish.
        If they remaine, then thou shalt liue thereby;
        They will remaine, and so thou canst not dye.

I:daniel2002020635
T:Sonnet XXXV
K:sonnet
TI:Thou canst not dye whilst any zeale abounde
TOC:Sonnet XXXV (Thou canst not dye whilst any zeale abounde)
F:Thou canst not dye whilst any zeale abounde

    Thou canst not dye whilst any zeale abounde
In feeling harts, that can conceiue these lines:
Though thou a <i>Laura</i> hast no <i>Petrarch</i> founde,
In base attire, yet cleerely Beautie shines.
    And I, though borne in a colder clime,
Doe feele mine inward heate as great, I knowe it:
He neuer had more faith, although more rime,
I loue as well, though he could better shew it.
    But I may ad one feather to thy fame,
To helpe her flight throughout the fairest Ile:
And if my penne could more enlarge thy name,
Then shouldst thou liue in an immortall stile.
        But though that <i>Laura</i> better limned bee,
        Suffice, thou shalt be lou'd as well as shee.

I:daniel2002020636
T:Sonnet XXXVI
K:sonnet
TI:O be not grieu'd that these my papers should
TOC:Sonnet XXXVI (O be not grieu'd that these my papers should)
F:O be not grieu'd that these my papers should

    O be not grieu'd that these my papers should,
Bewray vnto the world howe faire thou art:
Or that my wits haue shew'd the best they could,
The chastest flame that euer warmed hart.
    Thinke not sweete <i>Delia</i>, this shall be thy shame,
My Muse should sound thy praise with mournefull warble:
How many liue, the glory of whose name,
Shall rest in yce, when thine is grau'd in Marble.
    Thou maist in after ages liue esteem'd,
Vnburied in these lines reseru'd in purenes;
These shall intombe those eyes, that haue redeem'd
Mee from the vulgar, thee from all obscurenes.
        Although my carefull accents neuer mou'd thee;
        Yet count it no disgrace that I haue lou'd thee.

I:daniel2002020637
T:Sonnet XXXVII
K:sonnet
TI:Delia these eyes that so admireth thine
TOC:Sonnet XXXVII (<I>Delia</I> these eyes that so admireth thine)
F:Delia these eyes that so admireth thine

    <i>Delia</i> these eyes that so admireth thine,
Haue seene those walles the which ambition reared,
To checke the world, how they intombd haue lyen
Within themselues; and on them ploughes haue eared.
    Yet for all that no barbarous hand attaynde,
The spoyle of fame deseru'd by vertuous men:
Whose glorious actions luckely had gainde,
Th'eternall Annalls of a happie pen.
    Why then though <i>Delia</i> fade let that not moue her,
Though time do spoyle her of the fairest vaile
That euer yet mortallitie did couer;
Which shall instarre the needle and the trayle.
        That grace, that vertue, all that seru'd t'in-woman;
        Dooth her vnto eternitie assommon.

I:daniel2002020638
T:Sonnet XXXVIII
K:sonnet
TI:Faire and louely maide, looke from the shore
TOC:Sonnet XXXVIII (Faire and louely maide, looke from the shore)
F:Faire and louely maide, looke from the shore

    Faire and louely maide, looke from the shore,
See thy <i>Leander</i> striuing in these waues:
Poore soule fore-spent, whose force can doe no more,
Now send foorth hopes, for now calme pittie saues.
    And wafte him to thee with those louely eyes,
A happy conuoy to a holy lande:
Now shew thy powre, and where thy vertue lyes,
To saue thine owne, stretch out the fayrest hand.
    Stretch out the fairest hand a pledge of peace,
That hand that dartes so right, and neuer misses:
Ile not reuenge olde wrongs, my wrath shall cease;
For that which gaue me woundes, Ile giue it kisses.
        Once let the Ocean of my cares finde shore,
        That thou be pleas'd, and I may sigh no more.

I:daniel2002020639
T:Sonnet XXXIX
K:sonnet
TI:Reade in my face, a volume of despayres
TOC:Sonnet XXXIX (Reade in my face, a volume of despayres)
F:Reade in my face, a volume of despayres

    Reade in my face, a volume of despayres,
The wayling Iliades of my tragicke wo;
Drawne with my bloud, and printed with my cares,
Wrought by her hand, that I haue honoured so.
    Who whilst I burne, she singes at my soules wrack,
Looking a loft from Turret of her pride:
There my soules tyrant ioyes her, in the sack
Of her owne seate, whereof I made her guide.
    There doe these smoakes that from affliction ryse,
Serue as an incense to a cruell Dame:
A Sacrifize thrice gratefull to her eyes,
Because their powre serue to exact the same.
        Thus ruines she, to satisfie her will;
        The Temple, where her name was honored still.

I:daniel2002020640
T:Sonnet XL
K:sonnet
TI:My <I>Cynthia</I> hath the waters of mine eyes
TOC:Sonnet XL (My <I>Cynthia</I> hath the waters of mine eyes)
F:My <I>Cynthia</I> hath the waters of mine eyes

    My <i>Cynthia</i> hath the waters of mine eyes,
The ready handmaides on her grace attending:
That neuer fall to ebbe, nor euer dryes,
For to their flowe she neuer graunts an ending.
    Th'Ocean neuer did attende more duely,
Vppon his Soueraignes course, the nights pale Queene:
Nor paide the impost of his waues more truely,
Then mine to her in truth haue euer beene.
    Yet nought the rocke of that hard hart can moue,
Where beate these teares with zeale, and fury driueth:
And yet I rather languish in her loue
Then I would ioy the fayrest she that liueth.
        I doubt to finde such pleasure in my gayning,
        As now I taste in compas of complayning.

I:daniel2002020641
T:Sonnet XLI
K:sonnet
TI:How long shall I in mine affliction morne
TOC:Sonnet XLI (How long shall I in mine affliction morne)
F:How long shall I in mine affliction morne

    How long shall I in mine affliction morne,
A burthen to my selfe, distress'd in minde:
When shall my interdicted hopes returne,
From out despayre wherein they liue confin'd.
    When shall her troubled browe charg'd with disdaine,
Reueale the treasure which her smyles impart:
When shall my faith the happinesse attaine,
To breake the yce that hath congeald her hart.
    Vnto her selfe, her selfe my loue dooth sommon,
If loue in her hath any powre to moue:
And let her tell me as she is a woman,
Whether my faith hath not deseru'd her loue.
        I knowe she cannot but must needes confesse it,
        Yet deignes not with one simple signe t'expresse it.

I:daniel2002020642
T:Sonnet XLII
K:sonnet
TI:Beautie, sweet loue, is like the morning dewe
TOC:Sonnet XLII (Beautie, sweet loue, is like the morning dewe)
F:Beautie, sweet loue, is like the morning dewe

    Beautie, sweet loue, is like the morning dewe,
Whose short refresh vpon the tender greene,
Cheeres for a time but tyll the Sunne doth shew,
And straight tis gone as it had neuer beene.
    Soone doth it fade that makes the fairest florish,
Short is the glory of the blushing Rose,
The hew which thou so carefully doost nourish,
Yet which at length thou must be forc'd to lose.
    When thou surcharg'd with burthen of thy yeeres,
Shalt bend thy wrinkles homeward to the earth:
When tyme hath made a pasport for thy feares,
Dated in age the Kalends of our death.
        But ah no more, thys hath beene often tolde,
        And women grieue to thinke they must be old.

I:daniel2002020643
T:Sonnet XLIII
K:sonnet
TI:I must not grieue my Loue, whose eyes would reede
TOC:Sonnet XLIII (I must not grieue my Loue, whose eyes would reede)
F:I must not grieue my Loue, whose eyes would reede

    I must not grieue my Loue, whose eyes would reede,
Lines of delight, whereon her youth might smyle:
Flowers haue a tyme before they come to seede,
And she is young and now must sport the while.
    Ah sport sweet Mayde in season of these yeeres,
And learne to gather flowers before they wither:
And where the sweetest blossoms first appeares,
Let loue and youth conduct thy pleasures thither.
    Lighten forth smyles to cleere the clowded ayre,
And calme the tempest which my sighes doe rayse:
Pittie and smyles doe best become the fayre,
Pittie and smyles shall yeeld thee lasting prayse.
        I hope to say when all my griefes are gone,
        Happy the hart that sigh'd for such a one.

I:daniel2002020644
T:Sonnet XLIIII
K:sonnet
TI:Drawne with th'attractiue vertue of her eyes
TOC:Sonnet XLIIII (Drawne with th'attractiue vertue of her eyes)
F:Drawne with th'attractiue vertue of her eyes

    Drawne with th'attractiue vertue of her eyes,
My toucht hart turnes it to that happie cost:
My ioyfull North, where all my fortune lyes,
The leuell of my hopes desired most.
    There where my <i>Delia</i> fayrer then the sunne,
Deckt with her youth whereon the world smyleth:
Ioyes in that honour which her beautie wonne,
Th'eternall volume which her fame compyleth.
    Florish faire <i>Albion</i>, glory of the North,
<i>Neptunes</i> darling helde betweene his armes:
Deuided from the world as better worth,
Kept for himselfe, defended from all harmes.
        Still let disarmed peace decke her and thee;
        And Muse-foe <i>Mars</i>, abroade farre fostred bee.

I:daniel2002020645
T:Sonnet XLV
K:sonnet
TI:Care-charmer sleepe, sonne of the Sable night
TOC:Sonnet XLV (Care-charmer sleepe, sonne of the Sable night)
F:Care-charmer sleepe, sonne of the Sable night

    Care-charmer sleepe, sonne of the Sable night,
Brother to death, in silent darknes borne:
Relieue my languish, and restore the light,
With darke forgetting of my cares returne.
    And let the day be time enough to morne,
The shipwrack of my ill-aduentred youth:
Let waking eyes suffice to wayle theyr scorne,
Without the torment of the nights vntruth.
    Cease dreames, th'ymagery of our day desires,
To modell foorth the passions of the morrow:
Neuer let rysing Sunne approue you lyers,
To adde more griefe to aggrauat my sorrow.
        Still let me sleepe, imbracing clowdes in vaine;
        And neuer wake, to feele the dayes disdayne.

I:daniel2002020646
T:Sonnet XLVI
K:sonnet
TI:Let others sing of Knights and Palladines
TOC:Sonnet XLVI (Let others sing of Knights and Palladines)
F:Let others sing of Knights and Palladines

    Let others sing of Knights and Palladines,
In aged accents, and vntimely words:
Paint shadowes in imaginary lines,
Which well the reach of their high wits records;
    But I must sing of thee and those faire eyes,
Autentique shall my verse in time to come,
When yet th'vnborne shall say, loe where she lyes,
Whose beautie made him speake that els was dombe.
    These are the Arkes the Tropheis I erect,
That fortifie thy name against old age,
And these thy sacred vertues must protect,
Against the Darke and times consuming rage.
        Though th'error of my youth they shall discouer,
        Suffice they shew I liu'd and was thy louer.

I:daniel2002020647
T:Sonnet XLVII
K:sonnet
TI:Like as the Lute that ioyes or els dislikes
TOC:Sonnet XLVII (Like as the Lute that ioyes or els dislikes)
F:Like as the Lute that ioyes or els dislikes

    Like as the Lute that ioyes or els dislikes,
As is his arte that playes vpon the same:
So sounds my Muse according as she strikes,
On my hart strings high tun'd vnto her fame.
    Her touch doth cause the warble of the sound,
Which heere I yeeld in lamentable wise,
A wailing deskant on the sweetest ground,
Whose due reports giue honor to her eyes.
    Els harsh my style, vntunable my Muse,
Hoarce sounds the voyce that prayseth not her name:
If any pleasing realish heere I vse,
Then iudge the world her beautie giues the same.
        O happie ground that makes the musique such,
        And blessed hand that giues so sweete a tuch.

I:daniel2002020648
T:Sonnet XLVIII
K:sonnet
TI:None other fame myne vnambitious Muse
TOC:Sonnet XLVIII (None other fame myne vnambitious Muse)
F:None other fame myne vnambitious Muse

    None other fame myne vnambitious Muse,
Affected euer but t'eternize thee:
All other honours doe my hopes refuse,
Which meaner priz'd and momentarie bee.
    For God forbid I should my papers blot,
With mercynary lines, with seruile pen:
Praising vertues in them that haue them not,
Basely attending on the hopes of men.
    No no my verse respects nor Thames nor Theaters,
Nor seekes it to be knowne vnto the Great:
But <i>Auon</i> rich in fame, though poore in waters,
Shall haue my song, where <i>Delia</i> hath her seate.
        <i>Auon</i> shall be my Thames, and she my Song;
        Ile sound her name the Ryuer all along.

I:daniel2002020649
T:Sonnet XLIX
K:sonnet
TI:Vnhappy pen and ill accepted papers
TOC:Sonnet XLIX (Vnhappy pen and ill accepted papers)
F:Vnhappy pen and ill accepted papers

    Vnhappy pen and ill accepted papers,
That intimate in vaine my chaste desiers,
My chaste desiers, the euer burning tapers,
Inkindled by her eyes celestiall fiers.
    Celestiall fiers and vnrespecting powers,
That deigne not view the glory of your might,
In humble lines the worke of carefull howers,
The sacrifice I offer to her sight.
    But sith she scornes her owne, this rests for me,
Ile mone my selfe, and hide the wrong I haue:
And so content me that her frownes should be
To my' infant stile the cradle, and the graue.
        What though my selfe no honor get thereby,
        Each byrd sings t'herselfe, and so will I.

I:daniel2002020650
T:Sonnet L
K:sonnet
TI:Loe heere the impost of a faith vnfaining
TOC:Sonnet L (Loe heere the impost of a faith vnfaining)
F:Loe heere the impost of a faith vnfaining

    Loe heere the impost of a faith vnfaining,
That loue hath paide, and her disdaine extorted:
Beholde the message of my iust complayning,
That shewes the world how much my griefe imported.
    These tributary plaintes fraught with desire,
I sende those eyes the cabinets of loue;
The Paradice whereto my hopes aspire,
From out this hell, which mine afflictions proue.
    Wherein I thus doe liue cast downe from myrth,
Pensiue alone, none but despayre about mee;
My ioyes abortiue, perisht at their byrth,
My cares long liu'de, and will not dye without mee.
        This is my state, and <i>Delias</i> hart is such;
        I say no more, I feare I saide too much.

I:daniel2002020651
T:An Ode
TI:An Ode
F:Nowe each creature ioyes the other

Nowe each creature ioyes the other,
    Passing happy daies and howers:
One byrd reports vnto another,
    In the fall of siluer showers,
Whilst the earth our common mother,
    Hath her bosome deckt with flowers.

Whilst the greatest torch of heauen,
    With bright rayes warmes <i>Floras</i> lappe:
Making nights and dayes both euen,
    Cheering plants with fresher sappe:
My field of flowers quite be-reauen,
    Wants refresh of better happe.

Eccho daughter of the ayre,
    Babbling gheste of Rocks and Hills,
Knowes the name of my fearce Fayre,
    And soundes the accents of my ills:
Each thing pitties my dispaire,
    Whilst that she her Louer kills.

Whilst that she O cruell Maide,
    Doth me, and my true loue dispise:
My liues florish is decayde
    That depended on her eyes:
But her will must be obaide,
    And well he'ends for loue who dies.
