H1:Five Sonnets

I:brooke200109021
T:Peace
TOC:I. Peace
F:Now, God be thanked Who has matched us with His hour
K:sonnet

Now, God be thanked Who has matched us with His hour 
    And caught our youth, and wakened us from sleeping, 
With hand made sure, clear eye, and sharpened power, 
    To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping, 
Glad from a world grown old and cold and weary, 
    Leave the sick hearts that honour could not move, 
And half-men, and their dirty songs and dreary, 
    And all the little emptiness of love! 

Oh! we, who have known shame, we have found release there, 
    Where there's no ill, no grief, but sleep has mending, 
        Naught broken save this body, lost but breath; 
Nothing to shake the laughing heart's long peace there 
    But only agony, and that has ending; 
        And the worst friend and enemy is but Death.

I:brooke200109022
T:Safety
TOC:II. Safety
F:Dear! of all happy in the hour, most blest
K:sonnet

Dear! of all happy in the hour, most blest 
      He who has found our hid security, 
Assured in the dark tides of the world that rest, 
      And heard our word, 'Who is so safe as we?' 
We have found safety with all things undying, 
      The winds, and morning, tears of men and mirth, 
The deep night, and birds singing, and clouds flying, 
      And sleep, and freedom, and the autumnal earth. 
We have built a house that is not for Time's throwing. 
      We have gained a peace unshaken by pain for ever. 
War knows no power. Safe shall be my going, 
      Secretly armed against all death's endeavour; 
Safe though all safety's lost; safe where men fall; 
And if these poor limbs die, safest of all.

I:brooke200109023
T:The Dead
TOC:III. The Dead
F:Blow out, you bugles, over the rich Dead!
K:sonnet

Blow out, you bugles, over the rich Dead! 
     There's none of these so lonely and poor of old, 
     But, dying, has made us rarer gifts than gold. 
These laid the world away; poured out the red 
Sweet wine of youth; gave up the years to be 
     Of work and joy, and that unhoped serene, 
     That men call age; and those who would have been, 
Their sons, they gave, their immortality.

Blow, bugles, blow! They brought us, for our dearth, 
     Holiness, lacked so long, and Love, and Pain, 
Honour has come back, as a king, to earth, 
     And paid his subjects with a royal wage; 
And Nobleness walks in our ways again; 
     And we have come into our heritage.

I:brooke200109024
T:The Dead
TOC:IV. The Dead
F:These hearts were woven of human joys and cares
K:sonnet

These hearts were woven of human joys and cares, 
     Washed marvellously with sorrow, swift to mirth. 
The years had given them kindness. Dawn was theirs, 
     And sunset, and the colours of the earth. 
These had seen movement, and heard music; known 
     Slumber and waking; loved; gone proudly friended; 
Felt the quick stir of wonder; sat alone; 
     Touched flowers and furs and cheeks. All this is ended. 

There are waters blown by changing winds to laughter 
And lit by the rich skies, all day. And after, 
     Frost, with a gesture, stays the waves that dance 
And wandering loveliness. He leaves a white 
     Unbroken glory, a gathered radiance, 
A width, a shining peace, under the night.

I:brooke200109025
T:The Soldier
TOC:V. The Soldier
F:If I should die, think only this of me
K:sonnet

If I should die, think only this of me: 
    That there's some corner of a foreign field 
That is for ever England. There shall be 
    In that rich earth a richer dust concealed; 
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware, 
    Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam; 
A body of England's, breathing English air, 
    Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.

And think, this heart, all evil shed away, 
    A pulse in the eternal mind, no less 
        Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given; 
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day; 
    And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness, 
        In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.

H1:

I:brooke200109026
T:The Old Vicarage
U:Glantchester
F:Just now the lilac is in bloom

Just now the lilac is in bloom,
All before my little room; 
And in my flower-beds, I think, 
Smile the carnation and the pink; 
And down the borders, well I know, 
The poppy and the pansy blow ... 
Oh! there the chestnuts, summer through, 
Beside the river make for you 
A tunnel of green gloom, and sleep 
Deeply above; and green and deep 
The stream mysterious glides beneath, 
Green as a dream and deep as death. 
- Oh, damn! I know it! and I know 
How the May fields all golden show, 
And when the day is young and sweet, 
Gild gloriously the bare feet 
That run to bathe ... 
               <I>Du lieber Gott!</I>
Here am I, sweating, sick, and hot, 
And there the shadowed waters fresh 
Lean up to embrace the naked flesh. 
<I>Temperamentvoll</I> German Jews 
Drink beer around; - and <I>there</I> the dews 
Are soft beneath a morn of gold. 
Here tulips bloom as they are told; 
Unkempt about those hedges blows 
An English unofficial rose; 
And there the unregulated sun 
Slopes down to rest when day is done, 
And wakes a vague unpunctual star, 
A slippered Hesper; and there are 
Meads towards Haslingfield and Coton 
Where das <I>Betreten</I>'s not <I>verboten</I>. 

<I>eithe genoimen</I> ... would I were 
In Grantchester, in Grantchester! - 
Some, it may be, can get in touch 
With Nature there, or Earth, or such. 
And clever modern men have seen 
A Faun a-peeping through the green, 
And felt the Classics were not dead, 
To glimpse a Naiad's reedy head, 
Or hear the Goat-foot piping low: ... 
But these are things I do not know. 
I only know that you may lie 
Day long and watch the Cambridge sky, 
And, flower-lulled in sleepy grass, 
Hear the cool lapse of hours pass, 
Until the centuries blend and blur 
In Grantchester, in Grantchester. ... 
Still in the dawnlit waters cool 
His ghostly Lordship swims his pool, 
And tries the strokes, essays the tricks, 
Long learnt on Hellespont, or Styx. 
Dan Chaucer hears his river still 
Chatter beneath a phantom mill. 
Tennyson notes, with studious eye, 
How Cambridge waters hurry by ... 
And in that garden, black and white, 
Creep whispers through the grass all night; 
And spectral dance, before the dawn, 
A hundred Vicars down the lawn; 
Curates, long dust, will come and go 
On lissom, clerical, printless toe; 
And oft between the boughs is seen 
The sly shade of a Rural Dean ... 
Till, at a shiver in the skies, 
Vanishing the Satanic cries, 
The prim ecclesiastic rout 
Leaves but a startled sleeper-out, 
Grey heavens, the first bird's drowsy calls, 
The falling house that never falls. 

God! I will pack, and take a train, 
And get me to England once again! 
For England's the one land, I know, 
Where men with Splendid Hearts may go; 
And Cambridgeshire, of all England, 
The shire for Men who Understand; 
And of <I>that</I> district I prefer 
The lovely hamlet Grantchester. 
For Cambridge people rarely smile, 
Being urban, squat, and packed with guile; 
And Royston men in the far South 
Are black and fierce and strange of mouth; 
At Over they fling oaths at one, 
And worse than oaths at Trumpington, 

And Ditton girls are mean and dirty, 
And there's none in Harston under thirty, 
And folks in Shelford and those parts 
Have twisted lips and twisted hearts, 
And Barton men make Cockney rhymes, 
And Coton's full of nameless crimes, 
And things are done you'd not believe 
At Madingley, on Christmas Eve. 
Strong men have run for miles and miles, 
When one from Cherry Hinton smiles; 
Strong men have blanched, and shot their wives, 
Rather than send them to St. Ives; 
Strong men have cried like babes, bydam, 
To hear what happened at Babraham. 
But Grantchester! ah, Grantchester! 
There's peace and holy quiet there, 
Great clouds along pacific skies, 
And men and women with straight eyes, 
Lithe children lovelier than a dream, 
A bosky wood, a slumbrous stream, 
And little kindly winds that creep 
Round twilight corners, half asleep. 
In Grantchester their skins are white; 
They bathe by day, they bathe by night; 
The women there do all they ought; 
The men observe the Rules of Thought. 
They love the Good; they worship Truth; 
They laugh uproariously in youth; 
(And when they get to feeling old, 
They up and shoot themselves, I'm told) ... 

Ah God! to see the branches stir 
Across the moon at Grantchester! 
To smell the thrilling-sweet and rotten 
Unforgettable, unforgotten 
River-smell, and hear the breeze 
Sobbing in the little trees. 
Say, do the elm-clumps greatly stand 
Still guardians of that holy land? 
The chestnuts shade, in reverend dream, 
The yet unacademic stream? 
Is dawn a secret shy and cold 
Anadyomene, silver-gold? 
And sunset still a golden sea 
From Haslingfield to Madingley? 
And after, ere the night is born, 
Do hares come out about the corn? 
Oh, is the water sweet and cool, 
Gentle and brown, above the pool? 
And laughs the immortal river still 
Under the mill, under the mill? 
Say, is there Beauty yet to find ? 
And Certainty? and Quiet kind? 
Deep meadows yet, for to forget 
The lies, and truths, and pain? ... oh! yet 
Stands the Church clock at ten to three? 
And is there honey still for tea?

I:brooke200109027
T:Heaven
F:Fish (fly-replete, in depth of June

Fish (fly-replete, in depth of June, 
Dawdling away their wat'ry noon) 
Ponder deep wisdom, dark or clear, 
Each secret fishy hope or fear. 
Fish say, they have their Stream and Pond; 
But is there anything Beyond? 
This life cannot be All, they swear, 
For how unpleasant, if it were! 
One may not doubt that, somehow, Good 
Shall come of Water and of Mud; 
And, sure, the reverent eye must see 
A Purpose in Liquidity. 
We darkly know, by Faith we cry, 
The future is not Wholly Dry. 
Mud unto mud! - Death eddies near - 
Not here the appointed End, not here! 
But somewhere, beyond Space and Time. 
Is wetter water, slimier slime! 
And there (they trust) there swimmeth One 
Who swam ere rivers were begun, 
Immense, of fishy form and mind, 
Squamous, omnipotent, and kind; 
And under that Almighty Fin, 
The littlest fish may enter in. 
Oh! never fly conceals a hook, 
Fish say, in the Eternal Brook, 
But more than mundane weeds are there, 
And mud, celestially fair; 
Fat caterpillars drift around, 
And Paradisal grubs are found; 
Unfading moths, immortal flies, 
And the worm that never dies. 
And in that Heaven of all their wish, 
There shall be no more land, say fish.

I:brooke200109028
T:Tiare Tahiti
F:Mamua, when our laughter ends

Mamua, when our laughter ends, 
And hearts and bodies, brown as white, 
Are dust about the doors of friends, 
Or scent ablowing down the night, 
Then, oh! then, the wise agree, 
Comes our immortality. 
Mamua, there waits a land 
Hard for us to understand. 
Out of time, beyond the sun, 
All are one in Paradise, 
You and Pupure are one, 
And Taü, and the ungainly wise. 
There the Eternals are, and there 
The Good, the Lovely, and the True, 
And Types, whose earthly copies were 
The foolish broken things we knew; 
There is the Face, whose ghosts we are; 
The real, the never-setting Star; 
And the Flower, of which we love 
Faint and fading shadows here; 
Never a tear, but only Grief; 
Dance, but not the limbs that move; 
Songs in Song shall disappear; 
Instead of lovers, Love shall be; 
For hearts, Immutability; 
And there, on the Ideal Reef, 
Thunders the Everlasting Sea! 

And my laughter, and my pain, 
Shall home to the Eternal Brain. 
And all lovely things, they say, 
Meet in Loveliness again; 
Miri's laugh, Teipo's feet, 
And the hands of Matua, 
Stars and sunlight there shall meet 
Coral's hues and rainbows there, 
And Teüra's braided hair; 
And with the starred <I>tiare's</I> white, 
And white birds in the dark ravine, 
And <I>flamboyants</I> ablaze at night, 
And jewels, and evening's after-green, 
And dawns of pearl and gold and red, 
Mamua, your lovelier head! 
And there'll no more be one who dreams 
Under the ferns, of crumbling stuff, 
Eyes of illusion, mouth that seems, 
All time-entangled human love. 
And you'll no longer swing and sway 
Divinely down the scented shade, 
Where feet to Ambulation fade, 
And moons are lost in endless Day. 
How shall we wind these wreaths of ours, 
Where there are neither heads nor flowers? 
Oh, Heaven's Heaven! - but we'll be missing 
The palms, and sunlight, and the south; 
And there's an end, I think, of kissing, 
When our mouths are one with Mouth. ... 

<I>Taü here</I>, Mamua, 
Crown the hair, and come away! 
Hear the calling of the moon, 
And the whispering scents that stray 
About the idle warm lagoon. 
Hasten, hand in human hand, 
Down the dark, the flowered way, 
Along the whiteness of the sand, 
And in the water's soft caress, 
Wash the mind of foolishness, 
Mamua, until the day. 
Spend the glittering moonlight there 
Pursuing down the soundless deep 
Limbs that gleam and shadowy hair, 
Or floating lazy, half-asleep. 
Dive and double and follow after, 
Snare in flowers, and kiss, and call, 
With lips that fade, and human laughter 
And faces individual, 
Well this side of Paradise! .... 
There's little comfort in the wise.
