CVS-TIMESTAMP: $Date$
STATUS:complete
VQ:korrektur1
VN:En public domain etext af Bob Blair. Originalen findes på <A CLASS=green HREF="http://www.geocities.com/~bblair/">Geocities</A>.

H1:No. 1

I:moore2000082901
T:Go Where Glory Waits Thee
U:Air - Maid of the Valley
F:Go where glory waits thee

     Go where glory waits thee,
     But while fame elates thee,
        Oh! still remember me.
     When the praise thou meetest
     To thine ear is sweetest,
        Oh! then remember me.
     Other arms may press thee,
     Dearer friends caress thee,
     All the joys that bless thee,
        Sweeter far may be;
     But when friends are nearest,
     And when joys are dearest,
        Oh! then remember me!

     When, at eve, thou rovest
     By the star thou lovest,
        Oh! then remember me.
     Think, when home returning,
     Bright we've seen it burning,
        Oh! thus remember me.
     Oft as summer closes,
     When thine eye reposes
     On its lingering roses,
        Once so loved by thee,
     Think of her who wove them,
     Her who made thee love them,
        Oh! then remember me.

     When, around thee dying,
     Autumn leaves are lying,
        Oh! then remember me.
     And, at night, when gazing
     On the gay hearth blazing,
        Oh! still remember me.
     Then should music, stealing
     All the soul of feeling,
     To thy heart appealing,
        Draw one tear from thee;
     Then let memory bring thee
     Strains I used to sing thee, -
        Oh! then remember me.

I:moore2000082902
T:War Song
U:Air - Molly Macalpin
F:Remember the Glories of Brien the Brave

     REMEMBER the glories of Brien the brave,
        Though the days of the hero are o'er,
     Though lost to Mononia and cold to the grave,
        He returns to Kinkora no more.
     That star of the field, which so often hath pour'd
        Its beam on the battle, is set;
     But enough of its glory remains on each sword,
        To light us to victory yet.

     Mononia! when Nature embellish'd the tint
        Of thy fields, and thy mountains so fair,
     Did she ever intend that a tyrant should print
        The footstep of slavery there?
     No! Freedom, whose smile we shall never resign,
        Go, tell our invaders, the Danes,
     That 'tis sweeter to bleed for an age at thy shrine,
        Than to sleep but a moment in chains.

     Forget not our wounded companions who stood
        In the day of distress by our side;
     While the moss of the valley grew red with their blood,
        They stirr'd not, but conquer'd and died.
     That sun which now blesses our arms with his light,
        Saw them fall upon Ossory's plain; -
     Oh! let him not blush, when he leaves us to-night,
        To find that they fell there in vain.

I:moore2000082903
T:The Harp That Once Through Tara's Halls
U:Air - Gramachree
F:The Harp That Once Through Tara's Halls

     THE harp that once through Tara's halls
        The soul of music shed,
     Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls,
        As if that soul were fled. -
     So sleeps the pride of former days,
        So glory's thrill is o'er,
     And hearts, that once beat high for praise,
        Now feel that pulse no more.

     No more to chiefs and ladies bright
        The harp of Tara swells;
     The chord alone, that breaks at night,
        Its tale of ruin tells.
     Thus Freedom now so seldom wakes,
        The only throb she gives,
     Is when some heart indignant breaks,
        To show that still she lives.

I:moore2000082904
T:Oh! Breathe Not His Name
U:Air - The Brown Maid
F:Oh! breathe not his name, let it sleep in the shade

     OH! breathe not his name, let it sleep in the shade,
     Where cold and unhonour'd his relics are laid:
     Sad, silent, and dark, be the tears that we shed,
     As the night-dew that falls on the grass o'er his head.

     But the night-dew that falls, though in silence it weeps,
     Shall brighten with verdure the grave where he sleeps;
     And the tear that we shed, though in secret it rolls,
     Shall long keep his memory green in our souls.

I:moore2000082905
T:When He Who Adores Thee
U:Air - The Fox's Sleep
F:When he, who adores thee, has left but the name

    WHEN he, who adores thee, has left but the name
        Of his fault and his sorrows behind,
     Oh! say wilt thou weep, when they darken the fame
        Of a life that for thee was resign'd?
     Yes, weep, and however my foes may condemn,
        Thy tears shall efface their decree;
     For Heaven can witness, though guilty to them,
        I have been but too faithful to thee.

     With thee were the dreams of my earliest love;
        Every thought of my reason was thine;
     In my last humble prayer to the Spirit above,
        Thy name shall be mingled with mine.
     Oh! blest are the lovers and friends who shall live
        The days of thy glory to see;
     But the next dearest blessing that Heaven can give
        Is the pride of thus dying for thee.

I:moore2000082906
T:Erin! The Tear and the Smile in Thine Eyes
U:Air - Aileen Aroon
F:Erin! The Tear and the Smile in Thine Eyes

     ERIN! the tear and the smile in thine eyes
     Blend like the rainbow that hangs in thy skies,
        Shining through sorrow's stream,
        Saddening through pleasure's beam,
        Thy suns with doubtful gleam,
           Weep while they rise.

     Erin, thy silent tear never shall cease,
     Erin, thy languid smile ne'er shall increase,
        Till, like the rainbow's light,
        Thy various tints unite,
        And form in heaven's sight
           One arch of peace!

I:moore2000082907
T:Fly Not Yet
U:Air - Planxty Kelly
F:Fly not yet, 'tis just the hour

     FLY not yet, 'tis just the hour,
     When pleasure, like the midnight flower
     That scorns the eye of vulgar light,
     Begins to bloom for sons of night,
        And maids who love the moon.
     'Twas but to bless these hours of shade
     That beauty and the moon were made;
     'Tis then their soft attractions glowing
     Set the tides and goblets flowing.
        Oh! stay, - Oh! stay, -
     Joy so seldom weaves a chain
     Like this to-night, that oh, 'tis pain
        To break its links so soon.

     Fly not yet, the fount that play'd
     In times of old through Ammon's shade,
     Though icy cold by day it ran,
     Yet still, like souls of mirth, began
        To burn when night was near.
     And thus, should woman's heart and looks
     At noon be cold as winter brooks,
     Nor kindle till the night, returning,
     Brings their genial hour for burning.
        Oh! stay, - Oh! stay, -
     When did morning ever break,
     And find such beaming eyes awake
        As those that sparkle here?

I:moore2000082908
T:Oh! Think Not My Spirits Are Always As Light
U:Air - John O'Reilly the Active
F:Oh! Think Not My Spirits Are Always As Light

     OH! think not my spirits are always as light,
        And as free from a pang as they seem to you now,
     Nor expect that the heart-beaming smile of to-night
        Will return with to-morrow to brighten my brow.
     No: - life is a waste of wearisome hours,
        Which seldom the rose of enjoyment adorns;
     And the heart that is soonest awake to the flowers,
        Is always the first to be touch'd by the thorns.
     But send round the bowl, and be happy awhile -
        May we never meet worse, in our pilgrimage here,
     Than the tear that enjoyment may gild with a smile,
        And the smile that compassion can turn to a tear.

     The thread of our life would be dark, Heaven knows
        If it were not with friendship and love intertwined;
     And I care not how soon I may sink to repose,
        When these blessing shall cease to be dear to my mind.
     But they who have loved the fondest, the purest,
        Too often have wept o'er the dream they believed;
     And the heart that has slumber'd in friendship securest
        Is happy indeed if 'twas never deceived.
     But send round the bowl; while a relic of truth
        Is in man or in woman, this prayer shall be mine, -
     That the sunshine of love may illumine our youth,
        And the moonlight of friendship console our decline.

  

I:moore2000082909
T:Though the Last Glimpse of Erin With Sorrow I See
U:Air - Coulin
F:Though the last glimpse of Erin with sorrow I see

     THOUGH the last glimpse of Erin with sorrow I see,
     Yet wherever thou art shall seem Erin to me;
     In exile thy bosom shall still be my home,
     And thine eyes make my climate wherever we roam.

     To the gloom of some desert or cold rocky shore,
     Where the eye of the stranger can haunt us no more,
     I will fly with my Coulin, and think the rough wind
     Less rude than the foes we leave frowning behind.

     And I'll gaze on thy gold hair as graceful it wreathes,
     And hang o'er thy soft harp, as wildly it breathes;
     Nor dread that the cold-hearted Saxon will tear
     One chord from that harp, or one lock from that hair.

  

I:moore2000082910
T:Rich and Rare Were the Gems She Wore
U:Air - The Summer is coming
F:Rich and Rare Were the Gems She Wore

     RICH and rare were the gems she wore,
     And a bright gold ring on her wand she bore;
     But oh! her beauty was far beyond
     Her sparkling gems, or snow-white wand.

     "Lady! dost thou not fear to stray,
     So lone and lovely through this bleak way?
     Are Erin's sons so good or so cold,
     As not to be tempted by woman or gold?"

     "Sir Knight! I feel not the least alarm,
     No son of Erin will offer me harm: -
     For though they love woman and golden store,
     Sir Knight! they love honour and virtue more!"

     On she went, and her maiden smile
     In safety lighted her round the green isle;
     And blest for ever is she who relied
     Upon Erin's honour and Erin's pride.

  

I:moore2000082911
T:As a Beam O'er the Face of the Waters May Glow
U:Air - The Young Man's Dream.
F:As a beam o'er the face of the waters may glow

     AS a beam o'er the face of the waters may glow
     While the tide runs in darkness and coldness below,
     So the cheek may be tinged with a warm sunny smile,
     Though the cold heart to ruin runs darkly the while.

     One fatal remembrance, one sorrow that throws
     Its bleak shade alike o'er our joys and our woes,
     To which life nothing darker or brighter can bring,
     For which joy has no balm and affliction no sting -

     Oh! this thought in the midst of enjoyment will stay,
     Like a dead, leafless branch in the summer's bright ray;
     The beams of the warm sun play round it in vain;
     It may smile in his light, but it blooms not again.

  

I:moore2000082912
T:The Meeting of the Waters
U:Air - The Old Head of Denis
F:There is not in the wide world a valley so sweet

     THERE is not in the wide world a valley so sweet
     As that vale in whose bosom the bright waters meet;
     Oh! the last rays of feeling and life must depart,
     Ere the bloom of that valley shall fade from my heart.

     Yet it was not that nature had shed o'er the scene
     Her purest of crystal and brightest of green;
     'Twas not her soft magic of streamlet or hill,
     Oh! no, - it was something more exquisite still.

     'Twas that friends, the beloved of my bosom, were near,
     Who made every dear scene of enchantment more dear,
     And who felt how the best charms of nature improve,
     When we see them reflected from looks that we love.

     Sweet vale of Avoca! how calm could I rest
     In thy bosom of shade, with the friends I love best,
     Where the storms that we feel in this cold world should cease,
     And our hearts, like thy waters, be mingled in peace.

  

I:moore2000082913
T:How Dear to Me the Hour
U:Air - The Twisting of the Rope
F:How dear to me the hour when daylight dies

     HOW dear to me the hour when daylight dies,
        And sunbeams melt along the silent sea,
     For then sweet dreams of other days arise,
        And memory breathes her vesper sigh to thee.

     And, as I watch the line of light, that plays
        Along the smooth wave toward the burning west,
     I long to tread that golden path of rays,
        And think 'twould lead to some bright isle of rest.

  

I:moore2000082914
T:Take Back the Virgin Page
U:Written on Returning a Blank Book
U:Air - Dermott
F:Take back the virgin page

     TAKE back the virgin page,
        White and unwritten still;
     Some hand, more calm and sage,
        The leaf must fill.
     Thoughts come, as pure as light
        Pure as even you require;
     But, oh! each word I write
        Love turns to fire.

     Yet let me keep the book:
        Oft shall my heart renew,
     When on its leaves I look,
        Dear thoughts of you.
     Like you, 'tis fair and bright;
        Like you, too bright and fair
     To let wild passion write
        One wrong wish there.

     Haply, when from those eyes
        Far, far away I roam,
     Should calmer thoughts arise
        Towards you and home;
     Fancy may trace some line,
        Worthy those eyes to meet,
     Thoughts that not burn, but shine,
        Pure, calm, and sweet.

     And as, o'er ocean far,
        Seamen their records keep,
     Led by some hidden star
        Through the cold deep;
     So may the words I write
        Tell through what storms I stray -
     You still the unseen light,
        Guiding my way.

  
H1:No. 2

I:moore2000082915
T:St. Senanus and the Lady
U:Air - The Brown Thorn
F:On! haste, and leave this sacred isle

            St. Senanus
     "ON! haste, and leave this sacred isle,
     Unholy bark, ere morning smile;
     For on thy deck, though dark it be,
        A female form I see;
     And I have sworn this sainted sod
     Shall ne'er by woman's feet by trod!"

             The Lady.
     "Oh! Father, send not hence my bark
     Through wintry winds and billows dark,
     I come, with humble heart, to share
        Thy morn and evening prayer;
     Nor mine the feet, oh! holy Saint,
     The brightness of thy sod to taint."

     The lady's prayer Senanus spurn'd;
     The winds blew fresh, the bark return'd.
     But legends hint, that had the maid
        Till morning's light delay'd,
     And given the saint one rosy smile,
     She ne'er had left his lonely isle.

  

I:moore2000082916
T:The Legacy
U:Air - Unknown
F:When in death I shall calmly recline

     WHEN in death I shall calmly recline,
        O bear my heart to my mistress dear,
     Tell her it lived upon smiles and wine
        Of the brightest hue, while it linger'd here.
     Bid her not shed one tear of sorrow
        To sully a heart so brilliant and light;
     But balmy drops of the red grape borrow,
        To bathe the relic from morn till night.

     When the light of my song is o'er,
        Then take my harp to your ancient hall;
     Hang it up at that friendly door,
        Where weary travellers love to call.
     Then if some bard, who roams forsaken,
        Revive its soft note in passing along,
     Oh! let one thought of its master waken
        Your warmest smile for the child of song.

     Keep this cup, which is now o'erflowing,
        To grace your revel, when I'm at rest;
     Never, oh! never its balm bestowing
        On lips that beauty hath seldom blest.
     But when some warm devoted lover
        To her he adores shall bathe its brim,
     Then, then my spirit around shall hover,
        And hallow each drop that foams for him.

  

I:moore2000082917
T:How Oft Has the Benshee Cried
U:Air - The Dear Black Maid
F:How oft has the Benshee cried

          HOW oft has the Benshee cried,
          How oft has death untied
          Bright links that Glory wove,
          Sweet bonds entwined by Love.
     Peace to each manly soul that sleepeth;
     Rest to each faithful eye that weepeth;
          Long may the fair and brave,
          Sigh o'er the hero's grave.

          We're fallen upon gloomy days!
          Star after star decays.
          Every bright name, that shed
          Light o'er the land, is fled.
     Dark falls the tear of him who mourneth
     Lost joy, or hope that ne'er returneth:
          But brightly flows the tear,
          Wept o'er a hero's bier.

          Quench'd are our beacon lights -
          Thou, of the Hundred Fights!
          Thou, on whose burning tongue
          Truth, peace, and freedom hung!
     Both mute, - but long as valour shineth,
     Or mercy's soul at war repineth,
          So long shall Erin's pride
          Tell how they lived and died.

  

I:moore2000082918
T:We May Roam Through This World
U:Air - Garyone
F:We may roam through this world, like a child at a feast

     WE may roam through this world, like a child at a feast,
        Who but sips of a sweet, and then flies to the rest;
     And, when pleasure begins to grow dull in the east,
        We may order our wings and be off to the west:
     But if hearts that feel, and eyes that smile,
        Are the dearest gifts that heaven supplies,
     We never need leave our own green isle,
        For sensitive hearts, and for sun-bright eyes.
     Then, remember, wherever your goblet is crown'd,
        Through this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
     When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
        Oh! remember the smile which adorns her at home.

     In England, the garden of Beauty is kept
        By a dragon of prudery placed within call;
     But so oft this unamiable dragon has slept,
        That the garden's but carelessly watch'd after all.
     Oh! they want the wild sweet-briery fence
        Which round the flowers of Erin dwells;
     Which warns the touch, while winning the sense,
        Nor charms us least when it most repels.
     Then remember, wherever your goblet is crown'd,
        Through this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
     When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
        Oh! remember the smile that adorns her at home.

     In France, when the heart of a woman sets sail,
        On the ocean of wedlock its fortune to try,
     Love seldom goes far in a vessel so frail,
        But just pilots her off, and then bids her good-bye.
     While the daughters of Erin keep the boy,
        Ever smiling beside his faithful oar,
     Through billows of woe, and beams of joy,
        The same as he look's when he left the shore.
     Then remember, wherever your goblet is crown'd,
        Through this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
     When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
        Oh! remember the smile that adorns her at home.

  

I:moore2000082919
T:Eveleen's Bower
U:Air - Unknown
F:Oh! weep for the hour

          OH! weep for the hour,
          When to Eveleen's bower,
     The Lord of the Valley with false vows came;
          The moon hid her light,
          From the heavens that night,
     And wept behind her clouds o'er the maiden's shame.

          The clouds pass'd soon
          From the chaste cold moon,
     And heaven smiled again with her vestal flame;
          But none will see the day,
          When the clouds shall pass away,
     Which that dark hour left upon Eveleen's fame.

          The white snow lay
          On the narrow path-way,
     When the Lord of the Valley cross'd over the moor;
          And many a deep print
          On the white snow's tint
     Show'd the track of his footstep to Eveleen's door.

          The next sun's ray
          Soon melted away
     Every trace on the path where the false Lord came;
          But there's a light above,
          Which alone can remove
     That stain upon the snow of fair Eveleen's fame.

  

I:moore2000082920
T:Let Erin Remember the Days of Old
U:Air - The Red Fox
F:Let Erin remember the days of old

     LET Erin remember the days of old,
        Ere her faithless sons betray'd her;
     When Malachi wore the collar of gold,
        Which he won from her proud invader,
     When her kings, with standard of green unfurl'd,
        Led the Red-Branch Knights to danger!
     Ere the emerald gem of the western world
        Was set in the crown of a stranger.

     On Lough Neagh's bank as the fisherman strays,
        When the clear cold eve's declining,
     He sees the round towers of other days
        In the wave beneath him shining:
     Thus shall memory often, in dreams sublime,
        Catch a glimpse of the days that are over;
     Thus, sighing, look through the waves of time,
        For the long-faded glories they cover.

  

I:moore2000082921
T:The Song of Fionnuala
U:Air - Arrah my dear Eveleen
F:Silent, oh Moyle, be the roar of thy water

     SILENT, oh Moyle, be the roar of thy water,
        Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose,
     While, murmuring mournfully, Lir's lonely daughter
        Tell's to the night-star her tale of woes.
     When shall the swan, her death-note singing,
        Sleep, with wings in darkness furl'd?
     When will heaven, its sweet bell ringing,
        Call my spirit from this stormy world?

     Sadly, oh Moyle, to thy winter-wave weeping,
        Fate bids me languish long ages away;
     Yet still in her darkness doth Erin lie sleeping,
        Still doth the pure light its dawning delay.
     When will that day-star, mildly springing,
        Warm our isle with peace and love?
     When will heaven, its sweet bell ringing,
        Call my spirit to the fields above?

  

I:moore2000082922
T:Come, Send Round the Wine
U:Air - We brought the Summer with us
F:Come, send round the wine, and leave points of belief

     COME, send round the wine, and leave points of belief
        To simpleton sages and reasoning fools;
     This moment's a flower too fair and brief
        To be wither'd and stain'd by the dust of the schools.
     Your glass may be purple, and mine may be blue,
        But, while they are fill'd from the same bright bowl,
     The fool who would quarrel for difference of hue,
        Deserves not the comfort they shed o'er the soul.

     Shall I ask the brave soldier, who fights by my side
        In the cause of mankind, if our creeds agree?
     Shall I give up the friend I have valued and tried,
        If he kneel not before the same altar with me?
     From the heretic girl of my soul should I fly?
        To seek somewhere else a more orthodox kiss?
     No, perish the hearts, and the laws that try
        Truth, valour, or love, by a standard like this!

  

I:moore2000082923
T:Sublime Was the Warning
U:Air - The Black Joke
F:Sublime was the warning that liberty spoke

     SUBLIME was the warning that liberty spoke,
     And grand was the moment when Spaniards awoke
        Into life and revenge from the conqueror's chain.
     Oh, Liberty! let not this spirit have rest,
     Till it move, like a breeze, o'er the waves of the west -
     Give the light of your look to each sorrowing spot,
     Nor, oh, be the Shamrock of Erin forgot
        While you add to your garland the Olive of Spain.

     If the fame of our fathers, bequeathed with their rights,
     Give to country its charm, and to home its delights;
        If deceit be a wound, and suspicion a stain,
     Then, ye men of Iberia, our cause is the same!
     And oh! may his tomb want a tear and a name,
     Who would ask for a nobler, a holier death,
     Than to turn his last sigh into victory's breath,
        For the Shamrock of Erin and the Olive of Spain!

     Ye Blakes and O'Donnels, whose fathers resign'd
     The green hills of their youth, among strangers to find
        That repose which, at home, they had sigh'd for in vain,
     Join, join in our hope that the flame, which you light,
     May be felt yet in Erin, as calm and as bright,
     And forgive even Albion while blushing she draws,
     Like a truant, her sword, in the long-slighted cause
        Of the Shamrock of Erin and Olive of Spain!

     God prosper the cause! - oh, it cannot but thrive,
     While the pulse of one patriot heart is alive,
        Its devotion to feel, and its rights to maintain;
     Then, how sainted by sorrow its martyrs will die!
     The finger of Glory shall point where they lie;
     While, far from the footstep of coward or slave,
     The young spirit of Freedom shall shelter their grave,
        Beneath Shamrocks of Erin and Olives of Spain!

  

I:moore2000082924
T:Believe Me, If All Those Endearing Young Charms
U:Air - My Lodging is on the cold Ground.
F:Believe me, if all those endearing young charms

     BELIEVE me, if all those endearing young charms,
        Which I gaze on so fondly to-day,
     Were to change by to-morrow, and fleet in my arms,
        Like fairy-gifts fading away,
     Thou wouldst still be adored, as this moment thou art,
        Let thy loveliness fade as it will,
     And around the dear ruin each wish of my heart,
        Would entwine itself verdantly still.

     It is not while beauty and youth are thine own,
        And thy cheek unprofaned by a tear,
     That the fervour and faith of a soul can be known,
        To which time will not make thee more dear:
     No, the heart that has truly loved never forgets,
        But as truly loves on to the close,
     As the sun-flower turns on her god, when he sets,
        The same look which she turn'd when he rose.

H1:No. 3

I:moore2000082925
T:Erin, Oh Erin
U:Air - Thamma Halla
F:Like the bright lamp, that shone in Kildare's holy fane

     LIKE the bright lamp, that shone in Kildare's holy fane,
        And burn'd through long ages of darkness and storm,
     Is the heart that sorrows have frown'd on in vain,
        Whose spirit outlives them, unfading and warm.
     Erin, oh Erin, thus bright through the tears
     Of a long night of bondage, thy spirit appears.

     The nations have fallen, and thou still art young,
        Thy sun is but rising, when others are set;
     And though slavery's cloud o'er thy morning hath hung,
        The full noon of freedom shall beam round thee yet.
     Erin, oh Erin, though long in the shade,
     Thy star will shine out when the proudest shall fade.

     Unchill'd by the rain, and unwaked by the wind,
        The lily lies sleeping through winter's cold hour,
     Till Spring's light touch her fetters unbind,
        And daylight and liberty bless the young flower.
     Thus Erin, oh Erin, thy winter is past,
     And the hope that lived through it shall blossom at last.

  

I:moore2000082926
T:Drink To Her
U:Air - Heigh ho! my Jackey
F:Drink to her who long

     DRINK to her who long
        Hath waked the poet's sigh,
     The girl who gave to song
        What gold could never buy.
     Oh! woman's heart was made
        For minstrel hands alone;
     By other fingers play'd,
        It yields not half the tone.
     Then here's to her who long
        Hath waked the poet's sigh,
     The girl who gave to song
        What gold could never buy.

     At Beauty's door of glass,
        When Wealth and Wit once stood,
     They ask'd her, "which might pass?"
        She answer'd, "he who could."
     With golden key Wealth thought
        To pass - but 'twould not do:
     While Wit a diamond brought,
        Which cut his bright way through.
     So here's to her who long
        Hath waked the poet's sigh,
     The girl who gave to song
        What gold could never buy.

     The love that seeks a home
        Where wealth or grandeur shines,
     Is like the gloomy gnome,
        That dwells in dark mines.
     But oh! the poet's love
        Can boast a brighter sphere;
     Its native home's above,
        Though woman keeps it here.
     Then drink to her who long
        Hath waked the poet's sigh,
     The girl who gave to song
        What gold could never buy.

  

I:moore2000082927
T:Oh! Blame Not the Bard
U:Air - Kitty Tyrrel
F:Oh! blame not the bard, if he fly to the bowers

     OH! blame not the bard, if he fly to the bowers
        Where Pleasure lies, carelessly smiling at Fame;
     He was born for much more, and in happier hours
        His soul might have burn'd with a holier flame.
     The string, that now languishes loose o'er the lyre,
        Might have bent a proud bow to the warrior's dart;
     And the lip, which now breathes but the song of desire
        Might have pour'd the full tide of a patriot's heart.

     But alas for his country! - her pride is gone by,
        And that spirit is broken which never would bend;
     O'er the ruin her children in secret must sigh,
        For 'tis treason to love her, and death to defend.
     Unprized are her sons, till they've learn'd to betray;
        Undistinguish'd they live, if they shame not their sires;
     And the torch, that would light them through dignity's way,
        Must be caught from the pile where their country expires.

     Then blame not the bard, if in pleasure's soft dream
        He should try to forget what he never can heal:
     Oh! give but a hope - let a vista but gleam
        Through the gloom of his country, and mark how he'll feel!
     That instant, his heart at her shrine would lay down
        Every passion it nursed, every bliss it adored;
     While the myrtle, now idly entwined with his crown,
        Like the wreath of Harmodius, should cover his sword.

     But though glory be gone, and though hope fade away,
        Thy name, loved Erin, shall live in his songs;
     Not even in the hour when his heart is most gay
        Will he lose the remembrance of thee and thy wrongs.
     The stranger shall hear thy lament on his plains;
        The sign of thy harp shall be sent o'er the deep,
     Till thy masters themselves, as they rivet thy chains,
        Shall pause at the song of their captive, and weep!

  

I:moore2000082928
T:While Gazing on the Moon's Light
U:Air - Oonagh
F:While gazing on the moon's light

     WHILE gazing on the moon's light,
        A moment from her smile I turn'd,
     To look at orbs that, more bright,
        In lone and distant glory burn'd.
          But too far
          Each proud star,
        For me to feel its warming flame;
          Much more dear
          That mild sphere,
        Which near our planet smiling came;
     Thus, Mary, be but thou my own,
        While brighter eyes unheeded play,
     I'll love those moonlight looks alone
        That bless my home and guide my way.

     The day had sunk in dim showers,
        But midnight now, with lustre meet,
     Illumined all the pale flowers,
        Like hope upon a mourner's cheek.
          I said (while
          The moon's smile
     Play'd o'er a stream, in dimpling bliss,)
          "The moon looks
          On many brooks,
        The brook can see no moon but this;"
     And thus, I thought, our fortunes run,
        For many a lover looks to thee,
     While oh! I feel there is but one,
        One Mary in the world for me.

  

I:moore2000082929
T:Ill Omens
U:Air - Kitty of Coleraine; or, Paddy's Resource
F:When daylight was yet sleeping under the pillow

     WHEN daylight was yet sleeping under the pillow,
        And stars in the heavens still lingering shone,
     Young Kitty, all blushing, rose up from her pillow,
        The last time she e'er was to press it alone.
     For the youth whom she treasured her heart and her soul in
        Had promised to link the last tie before noon;
     And when once the young heart of a maiden is stolen,
        The maiden herself will steal after it soon.

     As she look'd in the glass, which a woman ne'er misses,
        Nor ever wants time for a sly glance or two,
     A butterfly, fresh from the night-flower's kisses,
        Flew over the mirror, and shaded her view.
     Enraged with the insect for hiding her graces,
        She brush'd him - he fell, alas! never to rise;
     "Ah! such," said the girl, "is the pride of our faces,
        For which the soul's innocence too often dies."

     While she stole through the garden, where heart's-ease was growing,
        She cull'd some, and kiss'd off its night-fallen dew;
     And a rose, further on, look'd so tempting and glowing,
        That, spite of her haste, she must gather it too:
     But while o'er the roses too carelessly leaning,
        Her zone flew in two, and the heart's-ease was lost:
     "Ah! this means," said the girl (and she sigh'd at its meaning),
        "That love is scarce worth the repose it will cost!"

  

I:moore2000082930
T:Before the Battle
U:Air - The Fairy Queen
F:By the hope within us springing

     BY the hope within us springing,
        Herald of to-morrow's strife;
     By that sun, whose light is bringing
        Chains or freedom, death or life -
     Oh! remember life can be
     No charm for him, who lives not free!
        Like the day-star in the wave,
        Sinks a hero in his grave,
     'Midst the dew-fall of a nation's tears.

        Happy is he o'er whose decline
        The smiles of home may soothing shine,
     And light him down the steep of years:
        But oh, how blest they sink to rest,
        Who close their eyes on victory's breast!

     O'er his watch-fire's fading embers
        Now the foeman's cheek turns white,
     When his heart that field remembers,
        Where we tamed his tyrant might.
     Never let him bind again
     A chain like that we broke from then.
        Hark! the horn of combat calls -
        Ere the golden evening falls,
     May we pledge that horn in triumph round.

        Many a heart that now beats high,
        In slumber cold at night shall lie,
     Nor waken even at victory's sound: -
        But oh how blest that hero's sleep,
        O'er whom a wondering world shall weep!

  

I:moore2000082931
T:After the Battle
U:Air - Thy Fair Bosom
F:Night closed around the conqueror's way

     NIGHT closed around the conqueror's way,
        And lightnings show'd the distant hill,
     Where those who lost that dreadful day
        Stood few and faint, but fearless still.
     The soldier's hope, the patriot's zeal,
        For ever dimm'd, for ever crost -
     Oh! who shall say what heroes feel,
        When all but life and honour's lost?

     The last sad hour of freedom's dream,
        And valour's task, moved slowly by,
     While mute they watch'd, till morning's beam
        Should rise and give them light to die.
     There's yet a world, where souls are free,
        Where tyrants taint not nature's bliss; -
     If death that world's bright opening be,
        Oh! who would live a slave in this?

  

I:moore2000082932
T:Tis Sweet to Think
U:Air - Thady, You Gander
F:Tis sweet to think that, where'er we rove

     'TIS sweet to think that, where'er we rove,
        We are sure to find something blissful and dear,
     And that, when we're far from the lips that we love,
        We've but to make love to the lips we are near.
     The heart, like a tendril, accustom'd to cling,
        Let it grow where it will, cannot flourish alone,
     But will lean to the nearest and loveliest thing
        It can twine with itself, and make closely its own.
     Then oh! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
        To be sure to find something, still, that is dear,
     And to know, when far from the lips we love,
        We've but to make love to the lips we are near.

     'Twere a shame, when flowers around us rise,
        To make light of the rest, if the rose isn't there,
     And the world's so rich in resplendent eyes,
        'Twere a pity to limit one's love to a pair.
     Love's wing and the peacock's are nearly alike,
        They are both of them bright, but the're changeable too,
     And wherever a new beam of beauty can strike,
        It will tincture Love's plume with a different hue.
     Then oh! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
        To be sure to find something, still, that is dear,
     And to know, when far from the lips we love,
        We've but to make love to the lips we are near.

  

I:moore2000082933
T:It Is Not the Tear At This Moment Shed
U:Air - The Sixpence
F:It is not the tear at this moment shed

     IT is not the tear at this moment shed,
        When the cold turf has just been laid o'er him,
     That can tell how beloved was the friend that's fled,
        Or how deep in our hearts we deplore him.
     'Tis the tear, through many a long day wept,
        'Tis life's whole path o'ershaded;
     'Tis the one remembrance, fondly kept,
        When all lighter griefs have faded.

     Thus his memory, like some holy light,
        Kept alive in our hearts, will improve them,
     For worth shall look fairer, and truth more bright,
        When we think how he lived but to love them.
     And as fresher flowers the sod perfume
        Where buried saints are lying,
     So our hearts shall borrow a sweetening bloom
        From the image he left there in dying!

  

I:moore2000082934
T:The Irish Peasant to his Mistress
U:Air - ___________________________________
F:Through grief and through danger thy smile hath cheer'd my way

     THROUGH grief and through danger thy smile hath cheer'd my way,
     Till hope seem'd to bud from each thorn that round me lay;
     The darker our fortune, the brighter our pure love burn'd,
     Till shame into glory, till fear into zeal was turn'd;
     Yes, slave as I was, in thy arms my spirit felt free,
     And bless'd even the sorrows that made me more dear to thee.

     Thy rival was honour'd, while thou wert wrong'd and scorn'd,
     Thy crown was of briers, while gold her brows adorn'd;
     She woo'd me to temples, while thou lay'st hid in caves,
     Her friends were all masters, while thine, alas! were slaves;
     Yet cold in the earth, at thy feet, I would rather be,
     Then wed what I loved not, or turn one thought from thee.

     They slander thee sorely, who say thy vows are frail -
     Hadst thou been a false one, thy cheek had look'd less pale.
     They say, too, so long thou hast worn those lingering chains -
     That deep in thy heart they have printed their servile stains -
     Oh! foul is the slander - no chain could that soul subdue -
     Where shineth thy spirit, there liberty shineth too!

  

I:moore2000082935
T:On Music
U:Air - Banks of Banna
F:When through life unblest we rove

     WHEN through life unblest we rove,
        Losing all that made life dear,
     Should some notes we used to love,
        In days of boyhood, meet our ear,
     Oh! how welcome breathes the strain!
        Wakening thoughts that long have slept,
     Kindling former smiles again
        In faded eyes that long have wept.

     Like the gale, that sighs along
        Beds of oriental flowers,
     Is the grateful breath of song,
        That once was heard in happier hours.
     Fill'd with balm the gale sighs on,
        Though the flowers have sunk in death;
     So, when pleasure's dream is gone,
        Its memory lives in Music's breath.

     Music, oh, how faint, how weak,
        Language fades before thy spell!
     Why should Feeling ever speak,
        When thou canst breathe her soul so well?
     Friendship's balmy words may feign,
        Love's are even more false than they;
     Oh! 'tis only music's strain
        Can sweetly soothe, and not betray.

  

I:moore2000082936
T:The Origin of the Harp
U:Air - Gage Fane
F:Tis believed that this Harp, which I wake now for thee

     'TIS believed that this Harp, which I wake now for thee
     Was a Siren of old, who sung under the sea;
     And who often, at eve, through the bright waters roved,
     To meet, on the green shore, a youth whom she loved.

     But she loved him in vain, for he left her to weep,
     And in tears, all the night, her gold tresses to steep,
     Till heaven look'd with pity on true-love so warm,
     And changed to this soft Harp the sea-maiden's form.

     Still her bosom rose fair - still her cheeks smiled the same -
     While her sea-beauties gracefully form'd the light
     And her hair, as, let loose, o'er her white arm it fell,
     Was changed to bright chords uttering melody's spell.

     Hence it came, that this soft Harp so long hath been known
     To mingle love's language with sorrow's sad tone;
     Till thou didst divide them, and teach the fond lay
     To speak love when I'm near thee, and grief when away.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082902">.
  
H1:No. 4

I:moore2000082937
T:Love's Young Dream
U:Air - The Old Woman
F:Oh! the days are gone, when Beauty bright

     OH! the days are gone, when Beauty bright
          My heart's chain wove;
     When my dream of life, from morn till night,
          Was love, still love.
          New hope may bloom,
          And days may come,
        Of milder calmer beam,
     But there's nothing half so sweet in life
        As love's young dream:
     No, there's nothing half so sweet in life
        As love's young dream.

     Though the bard to purer fame may soar,
          When wild youth's past;
     Though he win the wise, who frown'd before,
          To smile at last;
          He'll never meet
          A joy so sweet,
        In all his noon of fame,
     As when first he sung to woman's ear
        His soul-felt flame,
     And, at every close, she blush'd to hear
        The one loved name.

     No, - that hallow'd form is ne'er forgot
          Which first love traced;
     Still it lingering haunts the greenest spot
          On memory's waste.
          'Twas odour fled
          As soon as shed;
        'Twas morning's winged dream;
     'Twas a light, tht ne'er can shine again
        On life's dull stream:
     Oh! 'twas light that n'er can shine again
        On life's dull stream.

  

I:moore2000082938
T:The Prince's Day
U:Air - St. Patrick's Day
F:Though dark are our sorrows, today we'll forget them

     THOUGH dark are our sorrows, today we'll forget them,
        And smile through our tears, like a sunbeam in showers:
     There never were hearts, if our rulers would let them,
        More form'd to be grateful and blest than ours.
          But just when the chain,
          Has ceased to pain,
        And hope has enwreathed it round with flowers,
          There comes a new link,
          Our spirits to sink -
     Oh! the joy that we taste, like the light of the poles,
        Is a flash amid darkness, too brilliant to stay;
     But, though 'twere the last little spark in our souls,
        We must light it up now, on our Prince's Day.

     Contempt on the minion who calls you disloyal!
        Though fierce to your foe, to your friends you are true;
     And the tribute most high to a head that is royal,
        Is love from a heart that loves liberty too.
          While cowards, who blight
          Your fame, your right,
        Would shrink from the blaze of the battle array,
          The Standard of Green
          In front would be seen -
     Oh, my life on your faith! were you summon'd this minute,
        You'd cast every bitter remembrance away,
     And show what the arm of old Erin has in it,
        When roused by the foe, on her Prince's Day.

     He loves the Green Isle, and his love is recorded
        In hearts which have suffer'd too much to forget;
     And hope shall be crown'd, and attachment rewarded,
        And Erin's gay jubilee shine out yet.
          The gem may be broke
          By many a stroke,
        But nothing can cloud its native ray;
          Each fragment will cast
          A light to the last -
     And thus, Erin, my country, though broken thou art,
        There's lustre wiithin thee, that ne'er will decay;
     A spirit which beams through each suffering part,
        And now smiles at all pain on the Prince's Day.

  

I:moore2000082939
T:Weep On, Weep On
U:Air - The Song of Sorrow
F:Weep on, weep on, your hour is past

     WEEP on, weep on, your hour is past,
        Your dreams of pride are o'er;
     The fatal chain is round you cast,
        And you are men no more.
     In vain the hero's heart hath bled;
        The sage's tongue hath warn'd in vain;
     Oh, Freedom! once thy flame hath fled,
        It never lights again!

     Weep on - perhaps in after days,
        They'll learn to love your name,
     When many a deed may wake in praise
        That long hath slept in blame.
     And when they tread the ruin'd isle,
        Where rest, at length, the lord and slave,
     They'll wondering ask, how hands so vile
        Could conquer hearts so brave?

     "'Twas fate," they'll say, "a wayward fate
        Your web of discord wove;
     And while your tyrants join'd in hate,
        You never join'd in love.
     But hearts fell off that ought to twine,
        And man profaned what God had given;
     Till some were heard to curse the shrine
        Where others knelt in heaven.!"

  

I:moore2000082940
T:Lesbia Hath a Beaming Eye
U:Air - Nora Creina
F:Lesbia hath a beaming eye

     LESBIA hath a beaming eye,
        But no one knows for whom it beameth;
     Right and left its arrows fly,
        But what they aim at no one dreameth.
     Sweeter 'tis to gaze upon
        My Nora's lid that seldom rises;
     Few its looks, but every one,
        Like unexpected light, surprises!
           Oh, my Nora Creina, dear,
        My gentle, bashful Nora Creina,
             Beauty lies
             In many eyes,
        But Love in yours, my Nora Creina.

     Lesbia wears a robe of gold,
        But all so close the nymph hath laced it,
     Not a charm of beauty's mould
        Presumes to stay where Nature placed it.
     Oh! my Nora's gown for me,
        That floats as wild as mountain breezes,
     Leaving every beauty free
        To sink or swell as Heaven pleases.
           Yes, my Nora Creina, dear,
        My simple, graceful Nora Creina,
             Nature's dress
             Is loveliness -
        The dress you wear, my Nora Creina.

     Lesbia hath a wit refined,
        But, when its points are gleaning round us,
     Who can tell if they're design'd
        To dazzle merely, or to wound us?
     Pillow'd on my Nora's heart,
        In safer slumber Love reposes -
     Bed of peace! whose roughest part
        Is but the crumpling of the roses.
           Oh! my Nora Creina, dear,
        My mild, my artless Nora Creina!
             Wit, though bright,
             Hath no such light
        As warms your eyes, my Nora Creina.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082903">.
  

I:moore2000082941
T:I Saw Thy Form in Youthful Prime
U:Air - Domhnall
F:I saw thy form in youthful prime

     I SAW thy form in youthful prime,
        Nor thought that pale decay
     Would steal before the steps of Time,
        And waste its bloom away, Mary!
     Yet still thy features wore that light,
        Which fleets not with the breath;
     And life ne'er look'd more truly bright
        Than in thy smile of death, Mary!

     As streams that run o'er golden mines,
        Yet humbly, calmly glide,
     Nor seem to know the wealth that shines
        Within their gentle tide, Mary!
     So veil'd beneath the simplest guise,
        Thy radiant genius shone,
     And that which charm'd all other eyes
        Seem'd worthless in thy own, Mary!

     If souls could always dwell above,
        Thou ne'er hadst left that sphere;
     Or could we keep the souls we love,
        We ne'er had lost thee here, Mary!
     Though many a gifted mind we meet,
        Though fairest forms we see,
     To live with them is far less sweet
        Than to remember thee, Mary!

  

I:moore2000082942
T:By That Lake, Whose Gloomy Shore
U:Air - The Brown Irish Girl
F:By that Lake, whose gloomy shore

     BY that Lake, whose gloomy shore
     Sky-lark never warbles o'er,
     Where the cliff hangs high and steep,
     Young Saint Kevin stole to sleep.
     "Here, at least," he calmly said,
     "Woman ne'er shall find my bed."
     Ah! the good Saint little knew
     What that wily sex can do.

     'Twas from Kathleen's eyes he flew -
     Eyes of most unholy blue!
     She had loved him well and long,
     Wish'd him hers, nor thought it wrong.
     Wheresoe'er the Saint would fly,
     Still he heard her light foot nigh;
     East or west, where'er he turn'd,
     Still her eyes before him burn'd.

     On the bold cliff's bosom cast,
     Tranquil now he sleeps at last;
     Dreams of heaven, nor thinks that e'er
     Woman's smile can haunt him there.
     But nor earth nor heaven is free
     From her power, if fond she be:
     Even now, while calm he sleeps,
     Kathleen o'er him leans and weeps.

     Fearless she had track'd his feet
     To this rocky wild retreat;
     And when morning met his view,
     Her mild glances met it too.
     Ah, your Saints have cruel hearts!
     Sternly from his bed he starts,
     And with rude repulsive shock
     Hurls her from the beetling rock.

     Glendalough, thy gloomy wave
     Soon was gentle Kathleen's grave!
     Soon the Saint (yet ah! too late,)
     Felt her love, and mourn'd her fate.
     When he said, "Heaven rest her soul!"
     Round the Lake light music stole;
     And her ghost was seen to glide,
     Smiling, o'er the fatal tide.

  

I:moore2000082943
T:She is Far From the Land
U:Air - Open the Door
F:She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps

     SHE is far from the land where her young hero sleeps,
        And lovers are round her, sighing;
     But coldly she turns from their gaze, and weeps,
        For her heart in his grave is lying.

     She sings the wild song of her dear native plains,
        Every note which he loved awaking; -
     Ah! little they think, who delight in her strains,
        How the heart of the Minstrel is breaking.

     He had lived for his love, for his country he died,
        They were all that to life had entwined him;
     Nor soon shall the tears of his country be dried,
        Nor long will his Love stay behind him.

     Oh! make her a grave where the sunbeams rest,
        When they promise a glorious morrow;
     They'll shine o'er her sleep, like a smile from the West,
        From her own loved island of sorrow.

I:moore2000082944
T:Nay, Tell Me Not, Dear
U:Air - Dennis, don't be threatening
F:Nay, tell me not, dear, that the goblet drowns

     NAY, tell me not, dear, that the goblet drowns
        One charm of feeling, one fond regret;
     Believe me, a few of thy angry frowns
        Are all I've sunk in its bright wave yet.
          Ne'er hath a beam
          Been lost in the stream
        That ever was shed from thy form or soul;
          The spell of those eyes,
          The balm of thy sighs,
        Still float on the surface, and hallow by bowl.
     Then fancy not, dearest, that wine can steal
        One blissful dream of the heart from me;
     Like founts that awaken the pilgrim's zeal,
     The bowl but brightens my love for thee.

     They tell us the Love in his fairy bower
        Had two blush-roses, of birth divine;
     He sprinkled the one with a rainbow's shower,
        But bathed the other with mantling wine.
          Soon did the buds
          That drunk of the floods
        Distill'd by the rainbow decline and fade;
          While those which the tide
          Of ruby had dyed
        All blush'd into beauty, like thee, sweet maid!
     Then fancy not, dearest, that wine can steal
        One blissful dream of the heart from me;
     Like founts that awaken the pilgrim's zeal,
        The bowl but brightens my love for thee.

  

I:moore2000082945
T:Avenging and Bright
U:Air - Crooghan a Venee
F:Avening and bright fall the swift sword of Erin

     AVENGING and bright fall the swift sword of Erin
        On him who the brave sons of Usna betray'd! -
     For every fond eye he hath waken'd a tear in
        A drop from his heart-wounds shall weep o'er her blade.

     By the red cloud that hung over Conor's dark dwelling,
        When Ulad's three champions lay sleeping in gore -
     By the billows of war, which so often, high swelling,,
        Have wafted these heroes to victory's shore -

     We swear to avenge them! - no joy shall be tasted,
        The harp shall be silent, the maiden unwed,
     Our halls shall be mute, and our fields shall lie wasted,
        Till vengeance is wreak'd on the murderer's head.

     Yes, monarch! though sweet are our home recollections,
        Though sweet are the tears that from tenderness fall;
     Though sweet are our friendships, our hopes, our affections,
        Revenge on a tyrant is sweetest of all!

  

I:moore2000082946
T:What the Bee Is To the Floweret
U:Air - The Yellow Horse
F:What the bee is to the flowert

              WHAT the bee is to the flowert,
      He. -     When he looks for honey-dew,
              Through the leaves that close embower it,
                 That, my love, I'll be to you.
              What the bank, with verdure glowing,
      She. -    Is to waves that wander near,
              Whispering kisses, while they're going,
                 That I'll be to you, my dear.
              But they say, the bee's a rover,
      She. -    Who will fly, when sweets are gone,
              And, when once the kiss is over,
                 Faithless brooks will wander on.
              Nay, if flowers will lose their looks
      He. -     If sunny banks will wear away,
              'Tis but right that bees and brooks
                 Should sip and kiss them, while they may.

  

I:moore2000082947
T:Love and the Novice
U:Air - Cean Dubh Delish
F:Here we dwell, in holiest bowers

     "HERE we dwell, in holiest bowers,
        Where angels of light o'er our orisans bend;
     Where sighs of devotion and breathings of flowers
        To heaven in mingled odour ascend.
           Do not disturb our calm, oh Love!
           So like is thy form to the cherubs above,
     It well might deceive such hearts as ours."

     Love stood near the Novice and listen'd,
        And Love is no novice in taking a hint;
     His laughing blue eyes soon with piety glisten'd;
        His rosy wing turn'd to heaven's own tint.
           "Who would have thought," the urchin cries,
           "That Love could so well, so gravely disguise
     His wandering wings, and wounding eyes?"

     Love now warms thee, waking and sleeping,
        Young Novice, to him all thy orisons rise.
     He tinges the heavenly fount with his weeping,
        He brightens the censer's flame with his sighs.
           Love is the Saint enshrined in thy breast,
           And angels themselves would admit such a guest,
     If he came to them clothed in Piety's vest.

  

I:moore2000082948
T:This Life Is All Chequer'd With Pleasures and Woes
U:Air - The Bunch of Green Rushes that grew at the Brim
F:This life is all chequer'd with pleasures and woes

     This life is all chequer'd with pleasures and woes,
        That chase one another like waves of the deep -
     Each brightly or darkly, as onward it flows,
        Reflecting our eyes, as they sparkle or weep.
     So closely our whims on our miseries tread,
        That the laugh is awaked ere the tear can be dried;
     And, as fast as the rain-drop of Pity is shed,
        The goose-plumage of Folly can turn it aside.
     But pledge me the cup - if existence would cloy,
        With hearts ever happy and heads ever wise,
     Be ours the light Sorrow, half-sister to Joy,
        And the light brilliant Folly that flashes and dies.

     When Hylas was sent with his urn to the fount,
        Through fields full of light, and with heart full of play,
     Light rambled the boy, over meadow and mount,
        And neglected his task for the flowers on the way.
     Thus many, like me, who in youth should have tasted
        The fountain that runs by Philosophy's shrine,
     Their time with the flowers on the margin have wasted,
        And left their light urns all as empty as mine.
     But pledge me the goblet; - while idleness weaves
        These flowerets together, should Wisdom but see
     One bright drop or two that has fall'n on the leaves
        From her fountain divine, 'tis sufficient for me.

H1:No. 5
  

I:moore2000082949
T:Oh, the Shamrock
U:Air - Alley Croker
F:Through Erin's Isle

          Through Erin's Isle
          To sport awhile
        As Love and Valour wander'd,
          With Wit, the sprite,
          Whose quiver bright
        A thousand arrows squander'd;
          Where'er they pass,
          A triple grass
        Shoots up, with dew-drops streaming,
          As softly green
          As emeralds seen
        Through purest crystal gleaming.
     Oh the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
          Chosen leaf
          Of Bard and Chief,
        Old Erin's native Shamrock!

          Says Valour, "See,
          They spring for me,
        Those leafy gems of morning!" -
          Says Love, "No, no,
          For me they grow,
        My fragrant path adorning."
          But Wit perceives
          The triple leaves,
        And cries, "Oh! do not sever
          A type that blends
          Three godlike friends,
        Love, Valour, Wit, for ever!"
     Oh, the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
          Chosen leaf, etc.

          So firmly fond
          May last the bond
        They wove that morn together,
          And ne'er may fall
          One drop of gall
        On Wit's celestial feather.
          May Love, as twine
          His flowers divine,
        Of thorny falsehood weed 'em:
          May Valour ne'er
          His standard rear
        Against the cause of Freedom!
     Oh the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
          Chosen leaf, etc.

  

I:moore2000082950
T:At the Mid Hour of Night
U:Air - Molly, my dear
F:At the mid hour of night, when stars are weeping, I fly

     At the mid hour of night, when stars are weeping, I fly
     To the lone vale we loved, when life shone warm in thine eye;
        And I think oft, if spirits can steal from the regions of air,
        To revisit past scenes of delight, thou wilt come to me there,
     And tell me our love is remember'd, even in the sky.

     Then I sing the wild song 'twas once such pleasure to hear!
     When our voices commingling breathed, like one, on the ear;
        And, as Echo far off through the vale my said orison rolls,
        I think, oh my love! 'tis thy voice from the Kingdom of Souls,
     Faintly answering still the notes that once were so dear.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082904">.
  

I:moore2000082951
T:One Bumper at Parting
U:Air - Moll Roe in the Morning
F:One bumper at parting! - though many

     ONE bumper at parting! - though many
        Have circled the board since we met,
     The fullest, the saddest of any
        Remains to be crown'd by us yet.
     The sweetness that pleasure hath in it
        Is always so slow to come forth,
     That seldom, alas, till the minute
        It dies, do we know half its worth.
     But come - may our life's happy measure
        Be all of such moments made up;
     They're born on the bosom of Pleasure,
        Thy die 'midst the tears of the cup.

     As onward we journey, how pleasant
        To pause and inhabit awhile
     Those few sunny spots, like the present,
        That 'mid the dull wilderness smile!
     But Time, like a pitiless master,
        Cries "Onward!" and spurs the gay hours -
     Ah, never doth Time travel faster
        Than when his way lies among flowers.
     But come - may our life's happy measure
        Be all of such moments made up;
     They're born on the bosom of Pleasure,
        They die 'midst the tears of the cup.

     We saw how the sun look'd in sinking,
        The waters beneath him how bright;
     And now, let our farewell of drinking
        Resemble that farewell of light.
     You saw how he finish'd by darting
        His beam o'er a deep billow's brim -
     So, fill up, let's shine at our parting,
        In full liquid glory, like him.
     And oh! may our life's happy measure
        Of moments like this be made up,
     'Twas born on the bosom of Pleasure,
        It dies 'mid the tears of the cup.

  

I:moore2000082952
T:Tis the Last Rose of Summer
U:Air - Groves of Blarney
F:Tis the last rose of summer

     'TIS the last rose of summer
        Left blooming alone;
     All her lovely companions
        Are faded and gone:
     No flower of her kindred,
        No rose-bud is nigh,
     To reflect back her blushes,
        Or give sigh for sigh.

     I'll not leave thee, thou lone one!
        To pine on the stem;
     Since the lovely are sleeping,
        Go, sleep thou with them.
     Thus kindly I scatter
        Thy leaves o'er the bed,
     Where thy mates of the garden
        Lie scentless and dead.

     So soon may I follow,
        When friendships decay,
     And from Love's shining circle
        The gems drop away.
     When true hearts lie wither'd,
        And fond ones are flown,
     Oh! who would inhabit
        This bleak world alone?

  

I:moore2000082953
T:The Young May Moon
U:Air - The Dandy O!
F:The young May moon is beaming, love

     THE young May moon is beaming, love.
     The glow-worm's lamp is gleaming, love.
          How sweet to rove,
          Through Morna's grove,
     When the drowsy world is dreaming, love!
     Then awake! - the heavens look bright, my dear,
     'Tis never too late for delight, my dear,
          And the best of all ways
          To lengthen our days
     Is to steal a few hours from the night, my dear!

     Now all the world is sleeping, love,
     But the Sage, his star-watch keeping, love,
          And I, whose star,
          More glorious far,
     Is the eye from that casement peeping, love.
     Then awake! - till rise of sun, my dear,
     The Sage's glass we'll shun, my dear,
          Or, in watching the flight
          Of bodies of light,
     He might happen to take thee for one, my dear.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082905">.
  

I:moore2000082954
T:The Minstrel Boy
U:Air - The Moreen
F:The Minstrel-Boy to the war is gone

     The Minstrel-Boy to the war is gone,
        In the ranks of death you'll find him;
     His father's sword he has girded on,
        And his wild harp slung behind him.
     "Land of song!" said the warrior-bard,
        "Though all the world betrays thee,
     One sword, at least, thy rights shall guard,
        One faithful harp shall praise thee!"

     The Minstrel fell! - but the foeman's chain
        Could not bring his proud soul under;
     The harp he loved ne'er spoke again,
        For he tore its chords asunder;
     And said, "No chains shall sully thee,
        Thou soul of love and bravery!
     Thy songs were made for the pure and free,
        They shall never sound in slavery."

  

I:moore2000082955
T:The Song of O'Ruark, Prince of Breffni
U:Air - The Pretty Girl milking her Cow
F:The valley lay smiling before me

     THE valley lay smiling before me,
        Where lately I left her behind;
     Yet I trembled, and something hung o'er me,
        That sadden'd the joy of my mind.
     I look'd for the lamp which, she told me,
        Should shine when her Pilgrim return'd;
     But, though darkness began to infold me,
        No lamp from the battlements burn'd!

     I flew to her chamber - 'twas lonely,
        As if the loved tenant lay dead; -
     Ah, would it were death, and death only!
        But no, the young false one had fled.
     And there hung the lute that could soften
        My very worst pains into bliss;
     While the hand that had waked it so often
        Now throbb'd to a proud rival's kiss.

     There was a time, falsest of women,
        When Breffni's good sword would have sought
     That man, through a million of foemen,
        Who dared but to wrong thee in thought!
     While now - oh degenerate daughter
        Of Erin, how fallen is thy fame!
     And through ages of bondage and slaughter,
        Our country shall bleed for thy shame.

     Already the curse is upon her,
        And strangers her valleys profane;
     They come to divide, to dishonour,
        And tyrants they long will remain.
     But onward! --- the green banner rearing,
        Go, flesh every sword to the hilt;
     On our side is Virtue and Erin,
        On theirs is the Saxon and Guilt.

  

I:moore2000082956
T:Oh! Had We Some Bright Little Isle of Our Own
U:Air - Sheela na Guira
F:Oh! had we some bright little isle of our own

     OH! had we some bright little isle of our own,
     In a blue summer ocean, far off and alone,
     Where a leaf never dies in the still blooming bowers,
     And the bee banquets on through a whole year of flowers;
          Where the sun loves to pause
             With so fond a delay,
          That the night only draws
             A thin veil o'er the day;
     Where simply to feel that we breathe, that we live,
     Is worth the best joy that life elsewhere can give.

     There with souls ever ardent and pure as the clime,
     We should love, as they loved in the first golden time;
     The glow of the sunshine, the balm of the air,
     Would steal to our hearts, and make all summer there.
          With affection as free
             From decline as the bowers,
          And, with hope, like the bee,
             Living always on flowers,
     Our life should resemble a long day of light,
     And our death come on, holy and calm as the night.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082906">.
  

I:moore2000082957
T:Farewell! - But Whenever You Welcome the Hour
U:Air - Moll Roone
F:Farewell! but whenever you welcome the hour

     FAREWELL! but whenever you welcome the hour
     That awakens the night-song of mirth in your bower,
     Then think of the friend who once welcomed it too,
     And forgot his own griefs to be happy with you.
     His griefs may return, not a hope may remain
     Of the few that have brighten'd his pathway of pain,
     But he ne'er will forget the short vision, that threw
     Its enchantment around him, while lingering with you.

     And still on that evening, when pleasure fills up
     To the highest top sparkle each heart and each cup,
     Where'er my path lies, be it gloomy or bright,
     My soul, happy friends, shall be with you that night;
     Shall join in your revels, your sports, and your wiles,
     And return to me, beaming all o'er with your smiles -
     Too blest, if it tells me that, 'mid the gay cheer,
     Some kind voice has murmur'd, "I wish he were here!"

     Let Fate do her worst, there are relics of joy,
     Bright dreams of the past, which she cannot destroy;
     Which come in the night-time of sorrow and care,
     And bring back the features that joy used to wear.
     Long, long be my heart with such memories fill'd!
     Like the vase, in which roses have once been distill'd -
     You may break, you may shatter the vase, if you will,
     But the scent of the roses will hang round it still.

  

I:moore2000082958
T:Oh! Doubt Me Not
U:Air - Yellow Wat and the Fox
F:Oh! doubt me not - the season

          OH! doubt me not - the season
             Is o'er when Folly made me rove,
          And now the vestal, Reason,
             Shall watch the fire awaked by Love.
     Although this heart was early blown,
        And fairest hands disturb'd the tree,
     They only shook some blossoms down -
        Its fruit has all been kept for thee.
          Then doubt me not - the season
             Is o'er when Folly made me rove,
          And now the vestal, Reason,
             Shall watch the fire awaked by Love.

          And though my lute no longer
             May sing of Passion's ardent spell,
          Yet, trust me, all the stronger
             I feel the bliss I do not tell.
     The bee through many a garden roves,
        And hums his lay of courtship o'er,
     But when he finds the flower he loves,
        He settles there, and hums no more.
          Then doubt me not - the season
             Is o'er when Folly kept me free,
          And now the vestal, Reason,
             Shall guard the flame awaked by thee.

N:Oversat af Aarestrup: <xref digt="aarestrup2000082907">.

I:moore2000082959
T:You Remember Ellen
U:Air - Were I a Clerk
F:You remember Ellen, our hamlet's pride

     YOU remember Ellen, our hamlet's pride,
        How meekly she bless'd her humble lot,
     When the stranger, William, had made her his bride,
        And love was the light of their lowly cot.
     Together they toil'd through winds and rains,
        Till William, at length, in sadness said,
     "We must seek our fortune on other plains;" -
        Then, sighing, she left her lowly shed.

     They roam'd a long and a weary way,
        Nor much was the maiden's heart at ease,
     When now, at close of one stormy day,
        They see a proud castle among the trees.
     "To-night," said the youth, "we'll shelter there;
        The wind blows cold, the hour is late;"
     So he blew the horn with a chieftain's air,
        And the porter bow'd, as they passd the gate.

     "Now, welcome, Lady," exclaim'd the youth, -
        "This castle is thine, and these dark woods all!"
     She believed him crazed, but his words were truth,
        For Ellen is Lady of Rosna Hall!
     And dearly the Lord of Rosna loves
        What William the stranger woo'd and wed;
     And the light of bliss, in these lordly groves,
        Shines pure as it did in the lowly shed.

  

I:moore2000082960
T:I'd Mourn the Hopes
U:Air - The Rose-Tree
F:I'd mourn the hopes that leave me

     I'D mourn the hopes that leave me,
        If thy smiles had left me too;
     I'd weep when friends deceive me,
        If thou wert, like them, untrue.
     But while I've thee before me,
        With heart so warm and eyes so bright,
     No clouds can linger o'er me,
        That smile turns them all to light.

     'Tis not in fate to harm me,
        While fate leaves thy love to me:
     'Tis not in joy to charm me,
        Unless joy be shared with thee.
     One minute's dream about thee
        Were worth a long, an endless year
     Of waking bliss without thee,
        My own love, my only dear!

     And though the hope be gone, love,
        That long sparkled o'er our way,
     Oh! we shall journey on, love,
        More safely, without its ray.
     Far better lights shall win me,
        Along the path I've yet to roam -
     The mind that burns within me,
        And pure smiles from thee at home.

     Thus, when the lamp that lighted
        The traveller at first goes out,
     He feels awhile benighted,
        And looks round in fear and doubt.
     But soon, the prospect clearing,
        By cloudless starlight on he treads,
     And thinks no lamp so cheering
        As the light which Heaven sheds.

  
H1:No. 6

I:moore2000082961
T:Come O'er the Sea
U:Air - Cuishlih ma Chree
F:Come o'er the sea

          COME o'er the sea,
          Maiden with me,
        Mine through sunshine, storm, and snows;
          Seasons may roll,
          But the true soul
        Burns the same, where'er it goes.
     Let fate frown on, so we love and part not;
     'Tis life where thou art, 'tis death were thou are not.
          Then come o'er the sea,
          Maiden with me,
        Come wherever the wild wind blows;
          Seasons may roll,
          But the true soul
        Burns the same, where'er it goes.

          Was not the sea
          Made for the Free,
        Land for courts and chains alone?
          Here we are slaves,
          But, on the waves,
        Love and Liberty's all our own.
     No eye to watch, and no tongue to wound us
     All earth forgot, and all heaven around us -
          Then come o'er the sea,
          Maiden, with me,
        Mine through sunshine, storms, and snows
          Seasons may roll,
          But the true soul
        Burns the same, where'er it goes.

  

I:moore2000082962
T:Has Sorrow Thy Young Days Shaded
U:Air - Sly Patrick
F:Has sorrow thy young days shaded

     HAS sorrow thy young days shaded,
        As clouds o'er the morning fleet?
     Too fast have those young days faded
        That, even in sorrow, were sweet?
     Does Time with his cold wing wither
        Each feeling that once was dear? -
     Then, child of misfortune, come hither,
        I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.

     Has love to that soul, so tender,
        Been like our Lagenian mine,
     Where sparkles of golden splendour
        All over the surface shine -
     But, if in pursuit we go deeper,
        Allured by the gleam that shone,
     Ah! false as the dream of the sleeper,
        Like Love, the bright ore is gone.

     Has Hope, like the bird in the story,
        That flitted from tree to tree
     With the talisman's glittering glory -
        Has Hope been that bird to thee?
     On branch after branch alighting,
        The gem did she still display,
     And, when nearest, and most inviting,
        Then waft the fair gem away?

     If thus the young hours have fleeted,
        When sorrow itself look'd bright;
     If thus the fair hope hath cheated,
        That led thee along so light;
     If thus the cold world now wither
        Each feeling that once was dear -
     Come, child of misfortune, come hither,
        I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.

  

I:moore2000082963
T:No, Not More Welcome
U:Air - Luggelaw
F:No, not more welcome the fairy numbers

     NO, not more welcome the fairy numbers
        Of music fall on the sleeper's ear,
     When half awaking from fearful slumbers,
        He thinks the full quire of heaven is near -
     Than came that voice, when, all forsaken,
        This heart long had sleeping lain,
     Nor thought its cold pulse would ever waken
        To such benign blessed sounds again.

     Sweet voice of comfort! 'twas like the stealing
        Of summer wind through some wreathed shell -
     Each secret winding, each inmost feeling
        Of all my soul echoed to its spell.
     'Twas whisper'd balm - 'twas sunshine spoken! -
        I'd live years of grief and pain
     To have my long sleep of sorrow broken
        By such benign blessed sounds again.

  

I:moore2000082964
T:When First I Met Thee
U:Air - O Patrick! fly from me
F:When first I met thee, warm and young

     WHEN first I met thee, warm and young,
        There shone such truth about thee,
     And on thy lip such promise hung,
        I did not dare to doubt thee.
     I saw thee change, yet still relied,
        Still clung with hope the fonder,
     And thought, though false to all beside,
        From me thou couldst not wander.
          But go, deceiver! go,
             The heart, whose hopes could make it
          Trust one so false, so low,
             Deserves that thou shouldst break it.

     When every tongue thy follies named,
        I fled the unwelcome story,
     Or found, in even the faults they blamed,
        Some gleams of future glory.
     I still was true, when nearer friends
        Conspired to wrong, to slight thee;
     The heart that now thy falsehood rends
        Would then have bled to right thee.
          But go, deceiver! go -
             Some day, perhaps, thou'lt waken
          From pleasure's dream, to know
             The grief of hearts forsaken.

     Even now, though youth its bloom has shed,
        No lights of age adorn thee;
     The few who loved thee once have fled,
        And they who flatter scorn thee.
     Thy midnight cup is pledged to slaves,
        No genial ties enwreath it;
     The smiling there, like light on graves,
        Has rank cold hearts beneath it.
          Go - go - though worlds were thine,
             I would not now surrender
          One taintless tear of mine
             For all thy guilty splendour!

     And days may come, thou false one! yet,
        When even those ties shall sever!
     When thou wilt call, with vain regret,
        On her thou'st lost for ever;
     On her who, in thy fortune's fall,
        With smiles had still received thee,
     And gladly died to prove thee all
        Her fancy first believed thee.
          Go - go - 'tis vain to curse,
             'Tis weakness to upbraid thee;
          Hate cannot wish thee worse
             Than guilt and shame have made thee.

I:moore2000082965
T:While History's Muse
U:Air - Paddy Wack
F:While History's Muse the memorial was keeping

     WHILE History's Muse the memorial was keeping
        Of all that the dark hand of Destiny weaves,
     Beside her the Genius of Erin stood weeping,
        For hers was the story that blotted the leaves.
     But oh! how the tear in her eyelids grew bright,
     When, after whole pages of sorrow and shame,
             She saw History write,
             With a pencil of light
     That illumed the whole volume, her Wellington's name.

     "Yet still the last crown of thy toils is remaining,
        The grandest, the purest, even thou hast yet known;
     Though proud was thy task, other nations unchaining,
        Far prouder to heal the deep wounds of thy own.
     At the foot of that throne, for whose weal thou hast stood,
     Go, plead for the land that first cradled thy fame,
             And, bright o'er the flood
             Of her tears, and her blood,
     Let the rainbow of Hope be her Wellington's name."

  

I:moore2000082966
T:The Time I've Lost in Wooing
U:Air - Peas upon a Trencher
F:The time I've lost in wooing

     THE time I've lost in wooing,
     In watching and pursuing
          The light that lies
          In woman's eyes,
     Has been my heart's undoing.
     Though Wisdom oft has sought me,
     I scorn'd the lore she brought me,
          My only books
          Were woman's looks,
     And folly's all they've taught me.

     Her smile when Beauty granted,
     I hung with gaze enchanted,
          Like him the Sprite,
          Whom maids by night
     Oft meet in glen that's haunted.
     Like him, too, Beauty won me,
     But while her eyes were on me,
          If once their ray
          Was turn'd away,
     O! winds could not outrun me.
     And are those follies going?
     And is my proud heart growing
          Too cold or wise
          For brilliant eyes
     Again to set it glowing?
     No, vain, alas! the endeavour
     From bonds so sweet to sever;
          Poor Wisdom's chance
          Against a glance
     Is now as weak as ever.

  

I:moore2000082967
T:Where is the Slave
U:Air - Sios augs sios liom
F:Oh, where's the slave so lowly

     OH, where's the slave so lowly,
     Condemn'd to chains unholy,
        Who, could he burst
        His bonds at first,
     Would pine beneath them slowly?
     What soul, whose wrongs degrade it,
     Would wait till time decay'd it,
        When thus its wing
        At once may spring
     To the throne of Him who made it?

     Farewell, Erin, - farewell, all,
     Who live to weep our fall!

     Less dear the laurel growing,
     Alive, untouch'd and blowing,
        Than that whose braid
        Is pluckd to shade
     The brows with victory glowing.
     We tread the land that bore us,
     Her green flag glitters o'er us,
        The friends we've tried
        Are by our side,
     And the foe we hate before us.

     Farewell, Erin, - farewell, all,
     Who live to weep our fall!

  

I:moore2000082968
T:Come, Rest in this Bosom
U:Air - Lough Sheeling
F:Come, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer

     COME, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer,
     Though the herd have fled from thee, thy home is still here;
     Here still is the smile, that no cloud can o'ercast,
     And a heart and a hand all thy own to the last.

     Oh! what was love made for, if 'tis not the same
     Through joy and through torment, through glory and shame?
     I know not, I ask not, if guilt's in that heart?
     I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.

     Thou hast call'd me thy angel in moments of bliss,
     And thy Angel I'd be, 'mid the horrors of this, -
     Through the furnace, unshrinking, thy steps to pursue,
     And shield thee, and save thee, - or perish there too!

  

I:moore2000082969
T:Tis Gone, And For Ever
U:Air - Savournah Deelish
F:Tis gone, and for ever, the light we saw breaking

     'TIS gone, and for ever, the light we saw breaking,
        Like Heaven's first dawn o'er the sleep of the dead -
     When Man, from the slumber of ages awaking,
        Look'd upward, and bless'd the pure ray, ere it fled.
     'Tis gone, and the gleams it has left of its burning,
     But deepen the long night of bondage and mourning,
     That dark o'er the kingdoms of earth is returning,
        And darkest of all, hapless Erin, o'er thee.

     For high was thy hope, when those glories were darting
        Around thee, through all the gross clouds of the world;
     When Truth, from her letters indignantly starting,
        At once, like a sun-burst, her banner unfurl'd.
     Oh! never shall earth see a moment so splendid!
     Then, then - had one Hymn of Deliverance blended
     The tongues of all nations - how sweet had ascended
        The first note of liberty , Erin, from thee!

     But, shame on those tyrants who envied the blessing!
        And shame on the light race, unworthy its good,
     Who, at Death's reeking altar, like furies, caressing
        The young hope of Freedom, baptised it in blood.
     Then vanish'd for ever that fair sunny vision,
     Which, spite of the slavish, the cold heart's derision,
     Shall long be remember'd, pure, bright, and elysian,
        As first it arose, my lost Erin, on thee.

  

I:moore2000082970
T:Fill the Bumper Fair
U:Air - Bob and Joan
F:Fill the bumper fair!

     FILL the bumper fair!
        Every drop we sprinkle
     O'er the brow of Care
        Smooths away a wrinkle.
     Wit's electric flame
        Ne'er so swiftly passes,
     As when through the frame
        It shoots from brimming glasses.
     Fill the bumper fair!
        Every drop we sprinkle
     O'er the brow of Care
        Smooths away a wrinkle.

     Sages can, they say,
        Grasp the lightning's pinions,
     And bring down its ray
        From the starr'd dominions:
     So we, Sages, sit,
        And, 'mid bumpers brightening,
     From the Heaven of Wit
        Draw down all its lightning.
          Fill the bumper, etc.

     Wouldst thou know what first
        Made our souls inherit
     This ennobling thirst
        For wine's celestial spirit?
     It chanced, upon that day,
        When, as bards inform us,
     Prometheus stole away
        The living fires that warm us:
          Fill the bumper etc.

     The careless Youth, when up
        To Glory's fount aspiring,
     Took nor urn nor cup
        To hide the pilfer'd fire in. -
     But oh, his joy, when, round
        The halls of heaven spying,
     Among the stars he found,
         The bowl of Bacchus lying!
          Fill the bumper, etc.

     Some drops were in that bowl,
        Remains of last night's pleasure,
     With which the Sparks of Soul
        Mix'd their burning treasure.
     Hence the goblet's shower
        Hath such spells to win us;
     Hence its mighty power
        O'er that flame within us.
     Fill the bumper fair!
        Every drop we sprinkle
     O'er the brow of Care
        Smooths away a wrinkle.

  

I:moore2000082971
T:In the Morning of Life
U:Air - The little Harvest Rose
F:In the morning of life, when its cares are unknown

     IN the morning of life, when its cares are unknown,
        And its pleasures in all their new lustre begin,
     When we live in a bright-beaming world of our own,
        And the light that surrounds us is all from within;
     Oh 'tis not, believe me, in that happy time
        We can love, as in hours of less transport we may; -
     Of our smiles, of our hopes, 'tis the gay sunny prime,
        But affection is truest when these fade away.

     When we see the first glory of youth pass us by,
        Like a leaf on the stream that will never return,
     When our cup, which had sparkled with pleasure so high,
        First tastes of the other, the dark-flowing urn;
     Then, then in the time when affection holds sway
        With a depth and a tenderness joy never knew;
     Love, nursed among pleasures, is faithless as they,
        But the love born of Sorrow, like Sorrow, is true.

     In climes full of sunshine, though splendid the flowers,
        Their sighs have no freshness, their odour no worth;
     'Tis the cloud and the mist of our own Isle of showers
        That call the rich spirit of fragrancy forth.
     So it is not 'mid splendour, prosperity, mirth,
        That the depth of Love's generous spirit appears;
     To the sunshine of smiles it may first owe its birth,
        But the soul of its sweetness is drawn out by tears.

  

I:moore2000082972
T:I Saw From the Beach
U:Air - Miss Molly
F:I saw from the beach, when the morning was shining

     I SAW from the beach, when the morning was shining,
        A bark o'er the waters move gloriously on;
     I came when the sun o'er that beach was declining,
        The bark was still there, but the waters were gone.

     And such is the fate of our life's early promise,
        So passing the spring-tide of joy we have known;
     Each wave that we danced on at morning ebbs from us,
        And leaves us, at eve, on the bleak shore alone.

     Oh, who would not welcome that moment's returning
        When passion first waked a new life through his frame,
     And his soul, like the wood that grows precious in burning,
        Gave out all its sweets to love's exquisite flame.

  

I:moore2000082973
T:Dear Harp of my Country
U:Air - New Langolee
F:Dear Harp of my Country! in darkness I found thee

     DEAR Harp of my Country! in darkness I found thee,
        The cold chain of Silence had hung o'er thee long.
     When proudly, my own Island Harp, I unbound thee,
        And gave all thy chords to light, freedom, and song.
     The warm lay of love and the light note of gladness
        Have waken'd thy fondest, thy livliest thrill,
     But, so oft hast thou echoed the deep sigh of sadness,
        That even in thy mirth it will steal from thee still.

     Dear Harp of my country! farewell to thy numbers,
        This sweet wreath of song is the last we shall twine!
     Go, sleep with the sunshine of Fame on thy slumbers,
        Till touch'd by some hand less unworthy than mine.
     If the pulse of the patriot, soldier, or lover,
        Have throbb'd at our lay, 'tis thy glory alone;
     I was but as the wind, passing heedlessly over,
        And all the wild sweetness I waked was thy own.

  
H1:No. 7

I:moore2000082974
T:My Gentle Harp
U:Air - The Coina, or Dirge
F:My gentle Harp, once more I waken

     MY gentle Harp, once more I waken
        The sweetness of thy slumbering strain;
     In tears our last farewell was taken,
        And now in tears we meet again.
     No light of joy hath o'er thee broken,
        But, like those harps whose heavenly skill
     Of slavery, dark as thine, hath spoken,
        Thou hang'st upon the willows still.

     And yet, since last thy chord resounded,
        An hour of peace and triumph came,
     And many an ardent bosom bounded
        With hopes - that now are turn'd to shame.
     Yet even then, while Peace was singing
        Her halcyon song o'er land and sea,
     Though joy and hope to others bringing,
        She only brought new tears to thee.

     Then, who can ask for notes of pleasure,
        My drooping Harp, from chords like thine?
     Alas, the lark's gay morning measure
        As ill would suit the swan's decline!
     Or how shall I, who love, who bless thee,
        Invoke thy breath for Freedom's strains,
     When even the wreaths in which I dress thee
        Are sadly mix'd - half flowers, half chains?

     But come - if yet thy frame can borrow
        One breath of joy, oh, breathe for me,
     And show the world, in chains and sorrow,
        How sweet thy music still can be;
     How gaily, even 'mid gloom surrounding,
        Thou yet canst wake at pleasure's thrill -
     Like Memnon's broken image sounding,
        'Mid desolation tunefull still!

  

I:moore2000082975
T:As Slow Our Ship
U:Air - The Girl I left behind me
F:As slow our ship her foamy track

     AS slow our ship her foamy track
        Against the wind was cleaving,
     Her trembling pennant still look'd back
        To that dear isle 'twas leaving.
     So loath we part from all we love,
        From all the links that bind us;
     So turn our hearts as on we rove,
        To those we've left behind us.

     When, round the bowl, of vanish'd years
        We talk, with joyous seeming, -
     With smiles that might as well be tears,
        So faint, so sad their beaming;
     While memory brings us back again
        Each early tie that twined us,
     Oh, sweet's the cup that circles then
        To those we've left behind us.

     And when, in other climes, we meet
        Some isle, or vale enhanting,
     Where all looks flowery, wild, and sweet,
        And nought but love is wanting;
     We think how great had been our bliss,
        If Heaven had but assign'd us
     To live and die in scenes like this,
        With some we've left behind us!

     As travellers oft look back at eve,
        When eastward darkly going,
     To gaze upon that light they leave
        Still faint behind them glowing -
     So, when the close of pleasure's day
        To gloom hath near consign'd us,
     We turn to catch one fading ray
        Of joy that's left beind us.

  

I:moore2000082976
T:When Cold in the Earth
U:Air - Limerick's Lamentation
F:When cold in the earth lies the friend thou hast loved

     WHEN cold in the earth lies the friend thou hast loved,
        Be his faults and his follies forgot by thee then;
     Or, if from their slumber the veil be removed,
        Weep o'er them in silence, and close it again.
     And oh! if 'tis pain to remember how far
        From the pathways of light he was tempted to roam,
     Be it bliss to remember that thou wert the star
        That arose on his darkness, and guided him home.

     From thee and thy innocent beauty first came
        The revealings, that taught him true love to adore,
     To feel the bright presence, and turn him with shame
        From the idols he blindly had knelt to before.
     O'er the waves of a life, long benighted and wild,
        Thou camest, like a soft golden calm o'er the sea;
     And if happiness purely and glowingly smiled
        On his evening horizon, the light was from thee.

     And though sometimes the shades of past folly might rise,
        And though falsehood again would allure him to stray,
     He but turn'd to the glory that dwelt in those eyes,
        And the folly, the falsehood, soon vanish'd away.
     As the Priests of the Sun, when their altar grew dim,
        At the day-beam alone could its lustre repair,
     So, if virtue a moment grew languid in him,
        He but flew to that smile and rekindled it there.

  

I:moore2000082977
T:Remember Thee!
U:Air - Castle Tirowen
F:Remember thee! yes, while there's life in this heart

     REMEMBER thee! yes, while there's life in this heart,
     It shall never forget thee, all lorn as thou art;
     More dear in thy sorrow, thy gloom, and thy showers,
     Than the rest of the world in their sunniest hours.

     Wert thou all that I wish thee, great, glorious, and free,
     First flower of the earth, and first gem of the sea,
     I might hail thee with prouder, with happier brow,
     But oh! could I love thee more deeply tha now?

     No, thy chains as they rankle, thy blood as it runs,
     But make thee more painfully dear to thy sons -
     Whose hearts, like the young of the desert-bird's nest,
     Drink love in each life-drop that flows from thy breast.

  

I:moore2000082978
T:Wreath the Bowl
U:Air - Noran Kista
F:Wreath the bowl

          WREATH the bowl
          With flowers of soul,
     The brightest Wit can find us,
          We'll take a flight
          Towards heaven to-night,
     And leave dull earth behind us.
          Should Love amid
          The wreaths be hid
     That Joy, the enchanter, brings us,
          No danger fear,
          While wine is near -
     We'll drown him if he stings us.
          Then, wreath the bowl
          With flowers of soul,
     The brightest Wit can find us.
          We'll take a flight
          Towards heaven to-night,
     And leave dull earth behind us.

          'Twas nectar fed
          Of old, 'tis said,
     Their Junos, Joves, Apollos,
          And man may brew
          His nectar too,
     The rich receipt's as follows:
          Take wine like this,
          Let looks of bliss
     Around it well be blended,
          Then bring Wit's beam
          To warm the stream,
     And there's your nectar, splendid!
          So, wreath the bowl,
          With flowers of soul,
     The brightest Wit can find us,
          We'll take a flight
          Towards heaven to-night,
     And leave dull earth behind us.

          Say, why did Time
          His glass sublime
     Fill up with sands unsightly,
          When wine, he knew,
          Runs brisker through,
     And sparkles far more brightly?
          Oh, lend it us,
          And, smiling thus,
     The glass in two we'll sever,
          Make pleasure glide
          In double tide,
     And fill both ends for ever!
          Then, wreath the bowl
          With flowers of soul
     The brightest Wit can find us;
          We'll take a flight
          Towards heaven to-night,
     And leave dull earth behind us.

  

I:moore2000082979
T:Whene'er I See Those Smiling Eyes
U:Air - Father Quinn
F:When'er I see those smiling eyes

     WHEN'ER I see those smiling eyes,
        So full of hope, and joy, and light,
     As if no cloud could ever rise,
        To dim a heaven so purely bright -
     I sigh to think how soon that brow
        In grief may lose its every ray,
     And that light heart, so joyous now,
        Almost forget it once was gay.

     For time will come with all its blights,
        The ruin'd hope, the friend unkind,
     And love, that leaves, where'er it lights,
        A chill'd or burning heart behind:
     While youth, that now like snow appears,
        Ere sullied by the darkening rain,
     When once 'tis touch'd by sorrow's tears,
        Can never shine so bright again.

  

I:moore2000082980
T:If Thou'lt Be Mine
U:Air - The Winnowing Sheet
F:If thou'lt be mine, the treasures of air

     IF thou'lt be mine, the treasures of air,
        Of earth, and sea, shall lie at thy feet;
     Whatever in Fancy's eye looks fair,
        Or in Hope's sweet music sounds most sweet,
            Shall be ours - if thou wilt be mine, love!

     Bright flowers shall bloom wherever we rove,
        A voice divine shall talk in each stream;
     The stars shall look like world of love,
        And this earth be all one beautiful dream
            In our eyes - if thou wilt be mine, love!

     And thoughts, whose source is hidden and high,
        Like streams that come from heaven-ward hills,
     Shall keep our hearts, like meads, that lie
        To be bathed by those eternal rills,
            Ever green, if thou wilt be mine, love!

     All this and more the Spirit of Love
        Can breathe o'er them who feel his spells;
     That heaven, which forms his home above,
        He can make on earth, wherever he dwells,
           As thou'lt own, - if thou wilt be mine, love!

  

I:moore2000082981
T:To Ladies' Eyes
U:Air - Fague a Ballagh
F:To Ladies' eyes a round, boy

     TO Ladies' eyes a round, boy,
        We can't refuse, we can't refuse;
     Though bright eyes so abound, boy,
        'Tis hard to choose, 'tis hard to choose.
     For thick as stars that lighten
        Yon airy bowers, yon airy bowers,
     The countless eyes that brighten
        This earth of ours, this earth of ours.
     But fill the cup - where'er, boy,
        Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
     We're sure to find Love there, boy,
        So drink them all! so drink them all!

     Some looks there are so holy,
        They seem but given, they seem but given,
     As shining beacons, solely,
        To light to heaven, to light to heaven,
     While some - oh! ne'er believe them -
        With tempting ray, with tempting ray,
     Would lead us (God forgive them!)
        The other way, the other way.
     But fill the cup - where'er, boy,
        Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
     We're sure to find Love there, boy;
        So drink them all! so drink them all!

     In some, as in a mirror,
        Love seems pourtray'd, Love seems pourtray'd,
     But shun the flattering error,
        'Tis but his shade, 'tis but his shade.
     Himself has fix'd his dwelling
        In eyes we know, in eyes we know,
     And lips - but this is telling -
        So here they go! so here they go!
     Fill up, fill up - where'er, boy,
        Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
     We're sure to find Love there, boy;
        So drink them all ! so drink them all!

  

I:moore2000082982
T:Forget Not the Field
U:Air - The Lamentation of Aughrim
F:Forget not the field where they perish'd

     FORGET not the field where they perish'd,
        The truest, the last of the brave,
     All gone - and the bright hope we cherish'd
        Gone with them, and quench'd in their grave!

     Oh! could we from death but recover
        Those hearts as they bounded before,
     In the face of high heaven to fight over
        That combat for freedom once more; -

     Could the chain for an instant be riven
        Which Tyranny flung round us then,
     No, 'tis not in Man, nor in Heaven,
        To let Tyranny bind it again!

     But 'tis past - and, though blazon'd in story
        The name of our Victor may be,
     Accurst is the march of that glory
        Which treads o'er the hearts of the free.

     For dearer the grave or the prison,
        Illumed by one patriot name,
     Than the trophies of all who have risen
        On Liberty's ruins to fame.

  

I:moore2000082983
T:Sail On, Sail On
U:Air - The Humming of the Ban
F:Sail on, sail on, thou fearless bark 

     Sail on, sail on, thou fearless bark -
        Where'er blows the welcome wind,
     It cannot lead to scenes more dark,
        More sad than those we leave behind.
     Each wave that passes seems to say,
        "Though death beneath our smile may be,
     Less cold we are, less false than they,
        Whose smiling wreck'd thy hopes and thee."

     Sail on, sail on - through endless space -
        Through calm - through tempest - stop no more:
     The stormiest sea's a resting-place
        To him who leaves such hearts on shore.
     Or - if some desert land we meet,
        Where never yet false-hearted men
     Profaned a world, that else were sweet -
        Then rest thee, bark, but not till then.

  
H1:No. 8

I:moore2000082984
T:Ne'er Ask the Hour
U:Air - My husband's a journey to Portugal gone
F:Ne'er ask the hour - what is it to us

     Ne'er ask the hour - what is it to us
        How Time deals out his treasures?
     The golden moments lent us thus
        Are not his coin, but Pleasure's.
     If counting them o'er could add to their blisses,
        I'd number each glorious second:
     But moments of joy are, like Lesbia's kisses,
        Too quick and sweet to be reckon'd.
     Then fill the cup - what is it to us
        How time his circle measures?
     The fairy hours we call up thus
        Obey no wand but Pleasure's.

     Young Joy ne'er thought of counting hours,
        Till Care, one summer's morning,
     Set up, among his smiling flowers,
        A dial, by way of warning.
     But Joy loved better to gaze on the sun,
        As long as its light was glowing,
     Than to watch with old Care how the shadow stole on,
        And how fast that light was going.
     So fill the cup - what is it to us
        How time his circle measures?
     The fairy hours we call up thus
        Obey no wand but Pleasure's.

  

I:moore2000082985
T:They May Rail at this Life
U:Air - Noch bonin shin doe
F:They may rail at this life - from the hour I began it

     THEY may rail at this life - from the hour I began it
        I found it a life full of kindness and bliss;
     And, until they can show me some happier planet,
        More social and bright, I'll content me with this.
     As long as the world has such lips and such eyes
        As before me this moment enraptured I see,
     They may say what they will of their orbs in the skies,
        But this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

     In Mercury's star, where each moment can bring them
        New sunshine and wit from the fountain on high,
     Though the nymphs may have livelier poets to sing them,
        They've none, even there, more enamour'd than I.
     And, as long as this harp can be waken'd to love,
        And that eye its divine inspiration shall be,
     They may talk as they will of their Edens above,
        But this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

     In that star of the west, by whose shadowy splendour,
        At twilight so often we've roam'd through the dew,
     There are maidens, perhaps, who have bosoms as tender,
        And look, in their twilights, as lovely as you.
     But though they were even more bright than the queen
        Of that Isle they inhabit in heaven's blue sea,
     As I never those fair young celestials have seen,
        Why - this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

     As for those chilly orbs on the verge of creation,
        Where sunshine and smiles must be equally rare,
     Did they want a supply of cold hearts for that station,
        Heaven knows we have plenty on earth we could spare,
     Oh! think what a world we should have of it here,
        If the haters of peace, of affection and glee,
     Were to fly up to Saturn's comfortless sphere,
        And leave earth to such spirits as you, love, and me.

  

I:moore2000082986
T:Oh For the Swords of Former Time
U:Air - Name Unknown
F:Oh for the swords of former time!

     OH for the swords of former time!
        Oh for the men who bore them,
     When, arm'd for Right, they stood sublime,
        And tyrants crouch'd before them:
     When free yet, ere courts began
        With honours to enslave him,
     The best honours worn by Man
        Were those which Virtue gave him.
     Oh for the swords, etc., etc.

     Oh for the Kings who flourish'd then!
        Oh for the pomp that crown'd them,
     When hearts and hands of freeborn men
        Were all the ramparts round them.
     When, safe built on bosoms true,
        The throne was but the centre,
     Round which Love a circle drew
        That Treason durst not enter.
     Oh, for the Kings who flourish'd then!
        Oh for the pomp that crown'd them,
     When hearts and hands of freeborn men
        Were all the ramparts round them!

  

I:moore2000082987
T:The Parallel
U:Air - I would rather than Ireland
F:Yes, sad one of Sion, if closely resembling

     YES, sad one of Sion, if closely resembling,
         In shame and in sorrow, thy wither'd-up heart -
     If drinking deep, deep, of the same "cup of trembling"
         Could make us thy children, our parent thou art.

     Like thee doth our nation lie conquer'd and broken,
         And fall'n from her head is the once royal crown;
     In her streets, in her halls, Desolation hath spoken,
         And "while it is day yet, her sun hath gone down."

     Like thine doth her exile, 'mid dreams of returning,
         Die far from the home it were life to behold;
     Like thine do her sons, in the day of their mourning
         Remember the bright things that bless'd them of old.

     Ah, well may we call her, like thee, "the Forsaken,"
         Her boldest are vanquish'd, her proudest are slaves;
     And the harps of her minstrels, when gayest they waken,
         Have tones 'mid their mirth like the wind over graves!

     Yet hadst thou thy vengeance - yet came there the morrow,
         That shines out, at last, on the longest dark night,
     When the sceptre, that smote thee with slavery and sorrow,
         Was shiver'd at once, like a reed, in thy sight.

     When that cup, which for others the proud Golden City
         Had brimm'd full of bitterness, drench'd her own lips;
     And the world she had trampled on heard, without pity,
         The howl in her halls, and the cry from her ships.

     When the curse Heaven keeps for the haughty came over,
         Her merchants rapacious, her rulers unjust,
     And a ruin at last for the earthworm to cover,
         The Lady of Kingdoms lay low in the dust.

  

I:moore2000082988
T:Drink of This Cup
U:Air - Paddy O'Rafferty
F:Drink of this cup; - you'll find there's a spell in

     DRINK of this cup; - you'll find there's a spell in
        Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
     Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen;
         Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.
     Would you forget the dark world we are in
         Just taste of the bubble that gleams on the top of it;
     But would you rise above earth, till akin
         To immortals themselves, you must drain every drop of it!
     Send round the cup - for oh there's a spell in
         Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
     Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
         Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

     Never was philter form'd with such power
         To charm and bewilder as this we are quaffing;
     Its magic began when, in Autumn's rich hour,
         A harvest of gold in the fields it stood laughing.
     There having, by Nature's enchantment, been fill'd
         With the balm and the bloom of her kindliest weather,
     This wonderful juice from its core was distill'd
         To enliven such hearts as are here brought together.
     Then drink of the cup - you'll find there's a spell in
         Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
     Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
         Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

     And though, perhaps - but breathe it to no one -
         Like liquor the witch brews at midnight so awful,
     This philter in secret was first taught to flow on,
         Yet 'tisn't less potent for being unlawful.
     And, even though it taste of the smoke of that flame
         Which in silence extracted its virtue forbidden -
     Fill up - there's a fire in some hearts I could name,
         Which may work too its charm, though as lawless and hidden.
     So drink of the cup - for oh there's a spell in
         Its very drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
     Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
         Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

  

I:moore2000082989
T:The Fortune-Teller
U:Air - Open the Door softly
F:Down in the valley come meet me to-night

     DOWN in the valley come meet me to-night,
        And I'll tell you your fortune truly
     As ever 'twas told, by the new-moon's light,
        To a young maiden, shining as newly.

     But, for the world, let no one be nigh,
        Lest haply the stars should deceive me,
     Such secrets between you and me and the sky
        Should never go farther, believe me.

     If at that hour the heavens be not dim,
        My science shall call up before you
     A male apparition - the image of him
        Whose destiny 'tis to adore you.

     And if to that phantom you'll be kind,
        So fondly around you he'll hover,
     You'll hardly, my dear, any difference find
        'Twixt him and a true living lover.

     Down at your feet, in the pale moonlight,
        He'll kneel, with a warmth of devotion -
     An ardour, of which such an innocent sprite
        You'd scarcely believe had a notion.

     What other thoughts and events may arise,
        As in destiny's book I've not seen them,
     Must only be left to the stars and your eyes
        To settle, ere morning, between them.

I:moore2000082990
T:Oh, Ye Dead!
U:Air - Plough Tune
F:Oh, ye Dead! oh, ye Dead! whom we know by the light you give

     OH, ye Dead! oh, ye Dead! whom we know by the light you give
     From your cold gleaming eyes, though you move like men who live,
          Why leave you thus your graves,
          In far off fields and waves,
     Where the worm and the sea-bird only know your bed,
          To haunt this spot where all
          Those eyes that wept your fall,
     And the hearts that wail'd you, like your own, lie dead?

     It is true, it is true, we are shadows cold and wan;
     And the fair and the brave whom we loved on earth are gone;
          But still thus even in death,
          So sweet the living breath
     Of the fields and the flowers in our youth we wander'd o'er,
          That ere, condemn'd, we go
          To freeze 'mid Hecla's snow,
     We would taste it a while, and think we live once more!

  

I:moore2000082991
T:O'Donohue's Mistress
U:Air - The Little and Great Mountain
F:Of all the fair months, that round the sun

     OF all the fair months, that round the sun
     In light-link'd dance their circles run,
        Sweet May, shine thou for me;
     For still, when thy earliest beams arise,
     That youth, who beneath the blue lake lies,
        Sweet May, returns to me.

     Of all the bright haunts, where daylight leaves
     Its lingering smile on golden eves,
        Fair lake, thou'rt dearest to me;
     For when the last April sun grows dim
     Thy Naiads prepare his steed for him
        Who dwells, bright lake, in thee.

     Of all the proud steeds that ever bore
     Young plumed Chiefs on sea or shore,
        White Steed, most joy to thee;
     Who still, with the first young glance of spring,
     From under that glorious lake dost bring
        My love, my chief, to me.

     While, white as the sail some bark unfurls,
     When newly launch'd, thy long mane curls,
        Fair Steed, as white and free;
     And spirits, from all the lake's deep bowers,
     Glide o'er the blue wave scattering flowers,
        Around my love and thee.

     Of all the sweet deaths that maidens die,
     Whose lovers beneath the cold wave lie,
        Most sweet that death will be,
     Which, under the next May evening's light,
     When thou and thy steed are lost to sight,
        Dear love, I'll die for thee.

  

I:moore2000082992
T:Echo
U:Air - The Wren
F:How sweet the answer Echo makes

     HOW sweet the answer Echo makes
          To music at night,
     When, roused by lute or horn, she wakes,
     And far away, o'er lawns and lakes,
          Goes answering light.

     Yet Love hath echoes truer far,
          And far more sweet,
     Than e'er beneath the moonlight's star,
     Of horn or lute, or soft guitar,
          The songs repeat.

     'Tis when the sigh, in youth sincere,
          And only then -
     The sigh that's breathed for one to hear,
     Is by that one, that only dear,
          Breathed back again!

  

I:moore2000082993
T:Oh, the Sight Entrancing
U:Air - Planxty Sudley
F:Oh, the sight entrancing

     OH, the sight entrancing,
     When morning's beam is glancing
          O'er files array'd
          With helm and blade,
     And plumes in the gay wind dancing!
     When hearts are all high beating
     And the trumpet's voice repeating
          That song, whose breath
          May lead to death,
     But never to entreating.
     Oh, the sight entrancing,
     When morning's beam is glancing
          O'er files array'd
          With helm and blade,
     And plumes in the gay wind dancing!

     Yet, tis not helm or feather -
     For ask yon despot, whether
          His plumed bands
          Could bring such hands
     And hearts as ours together.
     Leave pomps to those who need 'em -
     Give man but heart and freedom,
          And proud he braves
          The gaudiest slaves
     That crawl where monarchs lead 'em.
     The sword may pierce the beaver,
     Stonewalls in time may sever,
          'Tis mind alone,
          Worth steel and stone,
     That keeps men free for ever.
     Oh, that sight entrancing,
     When the morning's beam is glancing,
          O'er files array'd
          With helm and blade,
     And in Freedom's cause advancing!

  

I:moore2000082994
T:Thee, Thee, Only Thee
U:Air - The Market-Stake
F:The dawning of morn, the daylight's sinking

     THE dawning of morn, the daylight's sinking,
     The night's long hours still find me thinking
        Of thee, thee, only thee.
     When friends are met, and goblets crown'd,
        And smiles are near, that once enchanted,
     Unreach'd by all that sunshine round,
        My soul, like some dark spot, is haunted
          By thee, thee, only thee.

     Whatever in fame's high path could waken
     My spirit once, is now forsaken
        For thee, thee, only thee.
     Like shores, by which some headlong bark
        To the ocean hurries, resting never,
     Life's scenes go by me, bright or dark,
        I know not, heed not, hastening ever
          To thee, thee, only thee.

     I have not a joy but of thy bringing,
     And pain itself seems sweet when springing
        From thee, thee, only thee.
     Like spells, that nought on earth can break,
        Till lips, that know the charm, have spoken,
     This heart, howe'er the world may wake
        Its grief, its scorn, can but be broken
          By thee, thee, only thee.

  

I:moore2000082995
T:Shall the Harp Then Be Silent
U:Air - Macfarlane's Lamentation
F:Shall the Harp then be silent, when he who first gave

     SHALL the Harp then be silent, when he who first gave
        To our country a name, is withdrawn from all eyes?
     Shall a Minstrel of Erin stand mute by the grave
        Where the first - where the last of her Patriots lies?

     No - faint though the death-song may fall from his lips,
        Though his Harp, like his soul, may with shadows be crost,
     Yet, yet shall it sound, 'mid a nation's eclipse,
        And proclaim to the world what a star hath been lost; - 

     What a union of all the affections and powers
        By which life is exalted, embellish'd, refined,
     Was embraced in that spirit - whose centre was ours,
        While its mighty circumference circled mankind.

     Oh, who that loves Erin, or who that can see,
        Through the waste of her annals, that epoch sublime -
     Like a pyramid raised in the desert - where he
        And his glory stand out to the eyes of all time;

     That one lucid interval, snatch'd from the gloom
        And the madness of ages, when fill'd with his soul,
     A Nation o'erleap'd the dark bounds of her doom,
        And for one sacred instant, touch'd Liberty's goal?

     Who, that ever hath heard him - hath drunk at the source
        Of that wonderful eloquence, all Erin's own,
     In whose high-thoughted daring, the fire, and the force,
        And the yet untamed spring of her spirit are shown?

     An eloquence rich, wheresoever its wave
        Wander'd free and triumphant, with thoughts that shone through
     As clear as the brook's "stone of lustre," and gave,
        With the flash of the gem, its solidity too.

     Who, what ever approach'd him, when free from the crowd,
        In a home full of love, he delighted to read
     'Mong the trees which a nation had given, and which bow'd,
        As if each brought a new civic crown for his head - 

     Is there one, who hath thus, through his orbit of life
        But at distance observed him - through glory, through blame,
     In the calm of retreat, in the grandeur of strife,
        Whether shining or clouded, still high and the same? - 

     Oh no, not a heart that e'er knew him but mourns
        Deep, deep, o'er the grave where such glory is shrined -
     O'er a monument Fame will preserve 'mong the urns
        Of the wisest, the bravest, the best of mankind!

  
H1:No. 9

I:moore2000082996
T:Sweet Innisfallen
U:Air - The Captivating Youth
F:Sweet Innisfallen, fare thee well

     SWEET Innisfallen, fare thee well,
        May calm and sunshine long be thine!
     How fair thou art let others tell -
        To feel how fair shall long be mine.

     Sweet Innisfallen, long shall dwell
        In memory's dream that sunny smile,
     Which o'er thee on that evening fell,
        When first I saw thy fairy isle.

     'Twas light, indeed, too blest for one,
        Who had to turn to paths of care -
     Through crowded haunts again to run,
        And leave thee bright and silent there;

     No more unto thy shores to come,
        But, on the world's rude ocean tost,
     Dream of thee sometimes as a home
        Of sunshine he had seen and lost.

     Far better in thy weeping hour
        To part from thee, as I do now,
     When mist is o'er thy blooming bowers,
        Like sorrow's veil on beauty's brow.

     For, though unrivall'd still thy grace,
        Thou dost not look, as then, too blest,
     But, thus in shadow, seem'st a place
        Where erring man might hope to rest -

     Might hope to rest, and find in thee
        A gloom like Eden's, on the day
     He left its shade, when every tree,
        Like thine, hung weeping o'er his way.

     Weeping or smiling, lovely isle!
        And all the lovelier for thy tears -
     For though but rare thy sunny smile,
        'Tis heaven's own glance when it appears.

     Like feeling hearts whose joys are few,
        But, when indeed they come, divine -
     The brightest light the sun e'er threw
        Is lifeless to one gleam of thine!

  

I:moore2000082997
T:Twas One of Those Dreams
U:Air - The Song of the Woods
F:Twas one of those dreams, that by music are brought

     'TWAS one of those dreams, that by music are brought,
     Like a bright summer haze, o'er the poet's warm thought -
     When, lost in the future, his soul wanders on,
     And all of this life, but its sweetness, is gone.

     The wild notes he heard o'er the water were those
     He had taught to sing Erin's dark bondage and woes,
     And the breath of the bugle now wafted them o'er
     From Dinis' green isle, to Glena's wooded shore.

     He listen'd - while, high o'er the eagle's rude nest,
     The lingering sounds on their way loved to rest;
     And the echoes sung back from their full mountain quire,
     As if loath to let song to enchanting expire.

     It seem'd as if every sweet note that died here
     Was again brought to life in some airier sphere,
     Some heaven in those hills, where the soul of the strain
     That had ceased upon earth was awaking again!

     Oh forgive, if, while listening to music, whose breath
     Seem'd to circle his name with a charm against death,
     He should feel a proud spirit within him proclaim,
     "Even so shalt thou live in the echoes of Fame:

     "Even so, though thy memory should now die away,
     'Twill be caught up again in some happier day,
     And the hearts and the voices of Erin prolong,
     Through the answering Future, thy name and thy song."

  

I:moore2000082998
T:Oh, Banquet Not
U:Air - Planxty Irwine
F:Oh, banquet not in those shining bowers

     OH, banquet not in those shining bowers,
        Where Youth resorts, but come to me,
     For mine's a garden of faded flowers,
        More fit for sorrow, for age, and thee.
     And there we shall have our feast of tears,
        And many a cup in silence pour;
     Our guests, the shades of former years,
        Our toasts, to lips that bloom no more.

     There, while the myrtle's withering boughs
        Their lifeless leaves around us shed,
     We'll brim the bowl to broken vows
        To friends long lost, the changed, the dead.
     Or, while some blighted laurel waves
        Its branches o'er the dreary spot,
     We'll drink to those neglected graves
        Where valour sleeps, unnamed, forgot.

  

I:moore2000082999
T:Fairest! Put on a While
U:Air - Cummilum
F:Fairest! put on a while

     FAIREST! put on a while
        These pinions of light I bring thee,
     And o'er thy own green isle
        In fancy let me wing thee.
     Never did Ariel's plume,
        At golden sunset, hover
     O'er scenes so full of bloom
        As I shall waft thee over.

     Fields, where the Spring delays
        And fearlessly meets the ardour
     Of the warm Summer's gaze,
        With only her tears to guard her;
     Rocks, through myrtle boughs
        In grace majestic frowning,
     Like some bold warrior's brows
        That Love hath just been crowning.

     Islets, so freshly fair,
        That never hath bird come nigh them,
     But, from his course through air,
        He hath been won down by them; -
     Types, sweet maid, of thee,
        Whose look, whose blush inviting,
     Never did Love yet see
        From heaven, without alighting.

     Lakes, where the pearl lies hid,
        And caves, where the gem is sleeping,
     Bright as the tears thy lid
        Lets fall in lonely weepin.
     Glens, where Ocean comes,
        To 'scape the wild wind's rancour;
     And harbours, worthiest homes
        Where Freedom's fleet can anchor.

     Then, if, while scenes so grand,
        So beautiful, shine before thee,
     Pride for thy own dear land
        Should haply be stealing o'er thee,
     Oh, let grief come first,
        O'er pride itself victorious -
     Thinking how man hath curst
        What Heaven hath made so glorious.

  

I:moore20000829100
T:Quick! We Have But a Second
U:Air - Paddy Snap
F:Quick! we have but a second

     QUICK! we have but a second,
        Fill round the cup while you may;
     For time, the churl, hath beckon'd,
        And we must away, away!
     Grasp the pleasure that's flying,
        For oh, not Orpheus' strain
     Could keep sweet hours from dying,
        Or charm them to life again.
          Then, quick! we have but a second,
             Fill round the cup while you may!
          For Time, the churl hath beckon'd,
             And we must away, away.

     See the glass, how it flushes,
        Like some young Hebe's lip,
     And half meets thine, and blushes
        That thou shouldst delay to sip.
     Shame, oh shame unto thee,
        If ever thou see'st that day,
     When a cup or lip shall woo thee,
        And turn untouch'd away!
          Then, quick! we have but a second,
             Fill round, fill round while you may,
          For Time, the churl, hath beckon'd,
             And we must away, away!

  

I:moore20000829101
T:And Doth Not a Meeting Like This
U:Air - Unknown
F:And doth not a meeting like this make amends

     AND doth not a meeting like this make amends
        For all the long years I've been wandering away -
     To see thus around me my youth's early friends,
        As smiling and kind as in that happy day?
     Though haply o'er some of your brows, as o'er mine,
        The snow - fall of time may be stealing - what then?
     Like Alps in the sunset, thus lighted by wine,
        We'll wear the gay tinge of youth's roses again.

     What soften'd remembrances come o'er the heart,
        In gazing on those we've been lost to so long!
     The sorrows, the joys, of which once they were part,
        Still round them, like visions of yesterday, throng.
     As letters some hand hath invisibly traced,
        When held to the flame, will steal out on the sight,
     So many a feeling, that long seem'd effaced,
        The warmth of a meeting like this brings to the light.

     And thus, as in memory's bark we shall glide,
        To visit the scenes of your boyhood anew,
     Though oft we may see, looking down on the tide,
        The wreck of full many a hope shining through;
     Yet still, as in fancy we point to the flowers,
        That once made a garden of all the gay shore,
     Deceived for a moment, we'll think them still ours,
        And breathe the fresh air of life's morning once more.

     So brief our existence, a glimpse, at the most,
        Is all we can have of the few we hold dear;
     And oft even joy is unheeded and lost,
        For want of some heart, that could echo it, near.
     Ah, well may we hope, when this short life is gone,
        To meet in some world of more permanent bliss,
     For a smile, or a grasp of the hand, hastening on,
        Is all we enjoy of each other in this.

     But, come, the more rare such delights to the heart,
        The more we should welcome and bless them the more;
     They're ours, when we meet - they are lost when we part,
        Like birds that bring Summer, and fly when 'tis o'er.
     Thus circling the cup, hand in hand, ere we drink,
        Let Sympathy pledge us, through pleasure, through pain,
     That, fast as a feeling but touches one link,
        Her magic shall send it direct through the chain.

  

I:moore20000829102
T:The Mountain Spite
U:Air - The Mountain Sprite
F:In yonder valley there dwelt, alone

     IN yonder valley there dwelt, alone,
     A youth, whose moments had calmly flown,
     'Till spells came o'er him, and, day and night,
     He was haunted and watch'd by a Mountain Sprite.

     As once, by moonlight, he wander'd o'er
     The golden sands of that Island shore,
     A foot-print sparkled before his sight -
     'Twas the fairy foot of the Mountain Sprite!

     Beside a fountain, one sunny day,
     As bending over the stream he lay,
     There peep'd down o'er him two eyes of light,
     And he saw in that mirror the Mountain Sprite.

     He turn'd, but, lo, like a startled bird,
     That spirit fled! - and the youth but heard
     Sweet music, such as marks the flight
     Of some bird of song, from the Mountain Sprite.

     One night, still haunted by that bright look,
     The boy, bewilder'd, his pencil took.
     And, guided only by memory's light,
     Drew the once-seen form of the Mountain Sprite.

     "Oh thou, who lovest the shadow," cried
     A voice, low whispering by his side,
     "Now turn and see," - here the youth's delight
     Seal'd the rosy lips of the Mountain Sprite.

     "Of all the Spirits of land and sea,"
     Then rapt he murmur'd, "there's none like thee,
     And oft, oh oft, may thy foot thus light
     In this lonely bower, sweet Mountain Sprite!"

  

I:moore20000829103
T:As Vanquish'd Erin
U:Air - The Boyne Water
F:As vanquish'd Erin wept beside

     AS vanquish'd Erin wept beside
        The Boyne's ill-fated river,
     She saw where Discord, in the tide,
        Had dropp'd his loaded quiver.
     "Lie hid," she cried, "ye venom'd darts,
        Where mortal eye may shun you;
     Lie hid - the stain of manly hearts,
        That bled for me, is on you."

     But vain her wish, her weeping vain -
        As Time too well hath taught her -
     Each year the Fiend returns again,
        And dives into that water;
     And brings, triumphant, from beneath
        His shafts of desolation,
     And sends them, wing'd with worse than death,
        Through all her maddening nation.

     Alas for her who sits and mourns,
        Even now, beside that river -
     Unwearied still the Fiend returns,
        And stored is still his quiver.
     "When will this end, ye Powers of Good?"
        She weeping asks for ever;
     But only hears, from out that flood,
        The Demon answer, "Never!"

  

I:moore20000829104
T:Desmond's Song
U:Air - Unknown
F:By the Feal's wave benighted

     BY the Feal's wave benighted,
        No star in the skies,
     To thy door by Love lighted,
        I first saw those eyes.
     Some voice whisper'd o'er me,
        As the threshold I cross'd,
     There was ruin before me,
        If I loved, I was lost.

     Love came, and brought sorrow
        Too soon in his train;
     Yet so sweet, that to-morrow
        'Twere welcome again.
     Though misery's full measure
        My portion should be,
     I would drain it with pleasure,
        If pour'd out by thee.

     You, who call it dishonour
        To bow to this flame,
     If you've eyes, look but on her,
        And blush while you blame.
     Hath the pearl less whiteness
        Because of its birth?
     Hath the violet less brightness
        For growing near earth?

     No - Man for his glory
        To ancestry flies;
     But Woman's bright story
        Is told in her eyes.
     While the Monarch but traces
        Through mortals his line,
     Beauty, born of the Graces,
        Ranks next to Divine!

  

I:moore20000829105
T:They Know Not My Heart
U:Air - Coolan Das
F:They know not my heart, who believe there can be

     They know not my heart, who believe there can be
     One stain of this earth in its feelings for thee;
     Who think, while I see thee in beauty's young hour,
     As pure as the morning's first dew on the flower,
     I could harm what I love, - as the sun's wanton ray
     But smiles on the dew-drop to waste it away.

     No - beaming with light as those young features are,
     There's a light round thy heart which is lovelier far:
     It is not that cheek - 'tis the soul dawning clear
     Through its innocent blush makes thy beauty so dear:
     As the sky we look up to, though glorious and fair,
     Is look'd up to the more, because Heaven lies there!

  

I:moore20000829106
T:I Wish I Was By That Dim Lake
U:Air - I wish I was on yonder Hill
F:I wish I was by that dim Lake

     I WISH I was by that dim Lake,
     Where sinful souls their farewell take
     Of this vain world, and half-way lie
     In death's cold shadow, ere they die.
     There, there, far from thee,
     Deceitful world, my home should be;
     Where, come what might of gloom and pain,
     False hope should n'er deceive again.

     The lifeless sky, the mournful sound
     Of unseen waters falling round;
     The dry leaves, quivering o'er my head,
     Like man, unquiet even when dead!
     These, ay, these shall wean
     My soul from life's deluding scene,
     And turn each thought, o'ercharged with gloom
     Like willows, downward towards the tomb.

     As they, who to their couch at night
     Would win repose, first quench the light,
     So must the hopes, that keep this breast
     Awake, be quench'd, ere it can rest.
     Cold, cold, this heart must grow,
     Unmmoved by either joy or woe,
     Like freezing founts, where all that's thrown
     Within their current turns to stone.

  

I:moore20000829107
T:She Sung of Love
U:Air - The Munster Man
F:She sung of Love, while o'er her lyre

     SHE sung of Love, while o'er her lyre
        The rosy rays of evening fell,
     As if to feed with their soft fire
        The soul within that trembling shell.
     The same rich light hung o'er her cheek,
        And play'd around those lips that sung
     And spoke, as flowers would sing and speak,
        If Love could lend their leaves a tongue.

     But soon the West no longer burn'd,
        Each rosy ray from heaven withdrew;
     And, when to gaze again I turn'd,
        The minstrel's form seem'd fading too.
     As if her light and heaven's were one,
        The glory all had left that frame;
     And from her glimmering lips the tone,
        As from a parting spirit, came.

     Who ever loved, but had the thought
        That he and all he loved must part?
     Fill'd with this fear, I flew and caught
        The fading image to my heart -
     And cried, "Oh Love! is this thy doom?
        Oh light of youth's resplendent day!
     Must ye then lose your golden bloom,
        And thus, like sunshine die away?"

  

I:moore20000829108
T:Sing - Sing - Music Was Given
U:Air - The Humours of Ballamaguiry; or the Old Langolee
F:Sing - sing - Music was given

     SING - sing - Music was given
        To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
     Souls here, like planets in heaven,
        By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.
     Beauty may boast of her eyes and her cheeks,
        But Love from the lips his true archery wings;
     And she, who but feathers the dart when she speaks,
        At once sends it home to the heart when she sings.
          Then sing - sing - Music was given,
             To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
          Souls here, like planets in heaven,
             By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.

     When Love, rock'd by his mother,
        Lay sleeping as calm as slumber could make him,
     "Hush, hush," said Venus, "no other
        Sweet voice but his own is worthy to wake him."
     Dreaming of music he slumber'd the while,
        Till faint from his lip a soft melody broke,
     And Venus, enchanted, look'd on with a smile,
        While Love to his own sweet singing awoke.
          Then sing - sing - Music was given,
             To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
          Souls here, like planets in heaven,
             By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.

  
H1:No. 10

I:moore20000829109
T:Though Humble the Banquet
U:Air - Farewell Eamon
F:Though humble the banquet to which I invite thee

     THOUGH humble the banquet to which I invite thee,
        Thou'lt find there the best a poor bard can command;
     Eyes, beaming with welcome, shall throng round, to light thee,
        And Love serve the feast with his own willing hand.

     And though Fortune may seem to have turn'd from the dwelling
        Of him thou regardest her favouring ray,
     Thou wilt find there a gift, all her treasures excelling,
        Which, proudly he feels, hath ennobled his way.

     'Tis that freedom of mind, which no vulgar dominion
        Can turn from the path a pure conscience approves,
     Which, with hope in the heart, and no chain on the pinion,
        Holds upwards its course to the light which it loves.

     'Tis this makes the pride of his humble retreat,
        And with this, though of all other treasures bereaved,
     The breeze of his garden to him is more sweet
        Than the costliest incense that Pomp e'er received.

     Then, come, if a board so untempting hath power
        To win thee from grandeur, its best shall be thine;
     And there's one, long the light of the bard's happy bower,
        Who, smiling will blend her bright welcome with mine.  [Image]


I:moore20000829110
T:Sing, Sweet Harp
U:Air - Unknown
F:Sing, sweet Harp, oh sing to me

     SING, sweet Harp, oh sing to me
        Some song of ancient days,
     Whose sounds, in this sad memory,
        Long-buried dreams shall raise; -
     Some lay that tells of vanish'd fame,
        Whose light once round us shone,
     Of noble pride, now turn'd to shame,
        And hopes for ever gone.
     Sing, sad Harp, thus sing to me;
        Alike our doom is cast,
     Both lost to all but memory,
        We live but in the past.

     How mournfully the midnight air
        Among thy chords doth sigh,
     As if it sought some echo there,
        Of voices long gone by; -
     Of chieftains, now forgot, who seem'd
        The foremost then in fame;
     Of Bards who, once immortal deem'd,
        Now sleep without a name.
     In vain, sad Harp, the midnight air
        Among thy chords doth sigh;
     In vain it seeks an echo there
        Of voices long gone by.

     Couldst thou but call those spirits round,
        Who once, in bower and hall,
     Sate listening to thy magic sound,
        Now mute and mouldering all; -
     But, no; they would but wake to weep
        Their children's slavery;
     Then leave them in their dreamless sleep,
        The dead, at least are free!
     Hush, hush, sad Harp, that dreary tone,
        That knell of Freedom's day;
     Or, listening to its death-like moan,
        Let me, too, die away.


I:moore20000829111
T:Song of the Battle Eve
U:(Time - the Ninth Century)
U:Air - Cruiskeen Lawn
F:To-morrow, comrade, we

     TO-MORROW, comrade, we
     On the battle-plain must be,
        There to conquer, or both lie low!
     The morning star is up -
     But there's wine still in the cup,
        And we'll take another quaff, ere we go, boy, go;
        We'll take another quaff, ere we go.

     'Tis true, in manliest eyes
     A passing tear will rise,
        When we think of the friends we leave lone;
     But what can wailing do?
     See, our goblet's weeping too!
        With its tears we'll chase away our own, boy, our own;
        With its tears we'll chase away our own.

     But daylight's stealing on;
     The last that o'er us shone
        Saw our children around us play;
     The next - ah! where shall we
     And those rosy urchins be?
        But - no matter - grasp thy sword and away, boy, away;
        No matter - grasp thy sword and away!

     Let those, who brook the chain
     Of Saxon or of Dane,
        Ignobly by their fire-sides stay;
     One sigh to home be given,
     One heartfelt prayer to heaven,
        Then, for Erin and her cause, boy, hurra! hurra! hurra!
        Then, for Erin and her cause, hurra!


I:moore20000829112
T:The Wandering Bard
U:Air - Planxty O'Reilly
F:What life like that of the bard can be 

     WHAT life like that of the bard can be -
     The wandering bard, who roams as free
     As the mountain lark that o'er him sings,
     And, like that lark a music brings,
     Within him, where'er he comes or goes -
     A fount that for ever flows!
     The world's to him like some playground,
     Where fairies dance their moonlight round; -
     It dimm'd the turf where late they trod;
     The elves but seek some greener sod;
     So, when less bright his scene of glee,
     To another away flies he!

     Oh, what would have been young Beauty's doom
     Without a bard to fix her bloom?
     They tell us, in the moon's bright round,
     Things lost in this dark world are found;
     So charms, on earth long pass'd and gone,
     In the poet's lay live on. -
     Would you have smiles that ne'er grow dim?
     You've only to give them all to him,
     Who, with but a touch of Fancy's wand,
     Can lend them life, this life beyond.
     And fix them high, in Poesy's sky -
     Young stars that never die!

     Then welcome the bard where'er he comes,
     For, though he hath countless airy homes,
     To which his wing excursive roves,
     Yet still, from time to time, he loves
     To light upon earth and find such cheer
     As brightens our banquet here.
     No matter how far, how fleet he flies,
     You've only to light up kind young eyes,
     Such signal-fires as here are given--
     And down he'll drop from Fancy's heaven,
     The minute such call to love or mirth
     Proclaim's he's wanting on the earth!

I:moore20000829113
T:Alone in Crowds to Wander On
U:Air - Shule Aroon
F:Alone in crowds to wander on

     ALONE in crowds to wander on,
     And feel that all the charm is gone
     Which voices dear and eyes beloved
     Shed round us once, where'er we roved -
     This, this the doom must be
     Of all who've loved, and loved to see
     The few bright things they thought would stay
     For ever near them, die away.

     Though fairer forms around us throng,
     Their smiles to others all belong,
     And want that charm which dwells alone
     Round those the fond heart calls its own,
     Where, where the sunny brow?
     The long-known voice - where are they now?
     Thus ask I still, nor ask in vain,
     The silence answers all too plain.

     Oh, what is Fancy's magic worth,
     If all her art cannot call forth
     One bliss like those we felt of old
     From lips now mute, and eyes now cold?
     No, no - her spell in vain -
     As soon could she bring back again
     Those eyes themselves from out the grave,
     As wake again one bliss they gave.

I:moore20000829114
T:I've a Secret to Tell Thee
U:Air - Oh! Southern Breeze
F:I've a secret to tell thee, but hush! not here 

     I'VE a secret to tell thee, but hush! not here -
        Oh! not where the world its vigil keeps:
     I'll seek, to whisper it in thine ear,
        Some shore where the Spirit of Silence sleeps;
     Where Summer's wave unmurmuring dies,
        Nor fay can hear the fountain's gush;
     Where, if but a note her night-bird sighs,
        The rose saith, chidingly, "Hush, sweet, hush!"

     There, amid the deep silence of that hour,
        When stars can be heard in ocean dip,
     Thyself shall, under some rosy bower,
        Sit mute, with thy finger on thy lip:
     Like him, the boy, who born among
        The flowers that on the Nile-stream blush,
     Sits ever thus - his only song
        To earth and heaven, "Hush, all, hush!"


I:moore20000829115
T:Song of Innisfail
U:Air - Peggy Bawn
F:They came from a land beyond the sea

     THEY came from a land beyond the sea,
        And now o'er the western main
     Set sail, in their good ships, gallantly,
        From the sunny land of Spain.
     "Oh, where's the isle we've seen in dreams,
        Our destined home or grave?"
     Thus sung they as, by the morning's beams,
        They swept the Atlantic wave.

     And lo, where afar o'er ocean shines
        A sparkle of radiant green,
     As though in that deep lay emerald mines,
        Whose light through the wave was seen.
     "'Tis Innisfail - 'tis Innisfail!"
        Rings o'er the echoing sea;
     While, bending to heaven, the warriors hail
        That home of the brave and free.

     Then turn'd they unto the Eastern wave,
        Where now their Day-God's eye
     A look of such sunny omen gave
        As lighted up sea and sky.
     Nor frown was seen through sky or sea,
        Nor tear o'er leaf or sod,
     When first on their Isle of Destiny
        Our great forefathers trod.

I:moore20000829116
T:The Night Dance
U:Air - The Nightcap
F:Strike the gay harp! see the moon is on high

     STRIKE the gay harp! see the moon is on high,
        And, as true to her beam as the tides of the ocean,
     Young hearts, when they feel the soft light of her eye,
        Obey the mute call, and heave into motion.
     Then, sound notes - the gayest, the lightest,
        That ever took wing, when heaven look'd brightest
             Again! Again!
     Oh! could such heart-stirring music be heard
        In that City of Statues described by romancers,
     So wakening its spell, even stone would be stirr'd,
        And statues themselves all start into dancers!

     Why then delay, with such sounds in our ears,
        And the flower of Beauty's own garden before us -
     While stars overhead leave the song of their spheres,
        And, listening to ours, hang wondering o'er us?
     Again, that strain! - to hear it thus sounding
        Might set even Death's cold pulses bounding -
             Again! Again!
     Oh, what delight when the youthful and gay
        Each with eye like a sunbeam and foot like a feather,
     Thus dance, like the Hours to the music of May,
        And mingle sweet song and sunshine together.

I:moore20000829117
T:There Are Sounds of Mirth
U:Air - The Priest in his Boots
F:There are sounds of mirth in the night-air ringing

     THERE are sounds of mirth in the night-air ringing,
        And lamps from every casement shown;
     While voices blithe within are singing,
        That seem to say "Come," in every tone.
     Ah! once how light, in Life's young season,
        My heart had leap'd at that sweet lay;
     Nor paused to ask of greybeard Reason
        Should I the syren call obey.

     And, see - the lamps still livelier glitter,
        The syren lips more fondly sound;
     No, seek, ye nymphs, some victim fitter
        To sink in your rosy bondage bound.
     Shall a bard, whom not the world in arms,
        Could bend to tyranny's rude countroul,
     Thus quail, at sight of woman's charms,
        And yield to a smile his freeborn soul?

     Thus sung the sage, while, slyly stealing,
        The nymphs their fetters around him cast,
     And - their laughing eyes, the while, concealing -
        Led Freedom's Bard their slave at last.
     For the Poet's heart, still prone to loving,
        Was like that rock of the Druid race,
     Which the gentlest touch at once set moving,
        But all earth's power couldn't cast from its base.


I:moore20000829118
T:Oh! Arranmore, Loved Arranmore
U:Air - Killdroughalt Fair
F:Oh! Arranmore, loved Arranmore

     OH! Arranmore, loved Arranmore,
        How oft I dream of thee,
     And of those days when, by thy shore,
        I wander'd young and free.
     Full many a path I've tried, since then,
        Through pleasure's flowery maze,
     But ne'er could find the bliss again
        I felt in those sweet days.

     How blithe upon thy breezy cliffs
        At sunny morn I've stood,
     With heart as bounding as the skiffs
        That danced along thy flood;
     Or, when the western wave grew bright
        With daylight's parting wing,
     Have sought that Eden in its light
        Which dreaming poets sing;

     That Eden where the immortal brave
        Dwell in a land serene -
     Whose bowers beyond the shining wave
        At sunset, oft are seen.
     Ah, dream too full of saddening truth!
        Those mansions o'er the main
     Are like the hopes I built in youth -
        As sunny and as vain!

I:moore20000829119
T:Lay His Sword By His Side
U:Air - If the Sea Were Ink
F:Lay his sword by his side - it hath served him too well

     LAY his sword by his side - it hath served him too well
        Not to rest near his pillow below;
     To the last moment true, from his hand ere it fell,
        Its point was still turn'd to a flying foe.
     Fellow-labourers in life, let them slumber in death,
        Side by side, as becomes the reposing brave -
     That sword which he loved still unbroke in its sheath,
        And himself unsubdued in his grave.

     Yet pause - for, in fancy, a still voice I hear,
        As if breathed from his brave heart's remains; -
     Faint echo of that which, in Slavery's ear,
        Once sounded the war-word, "Burst your chains."
     And it cries, from the grave where the hero lies deep,
        "Though the day of your Chieftain for ever hath set,
     Oh leave not his sword thus inglorious to sleep -
        It hath victory's life in it yet!

     "Should some alien, unworthy such weapon to wield,
        Dare to touch thee, my own gallant sword,
     Then rest in thy sheath, like a talisman seal'd,
        Or return to the grave of thy chainless lord.
     But, if grasp'd by a hand that hath learn'd the proud use
        Of a falchion, like thee, on the battle-plain,
     Then, at Liberty's summons, like lightning let loose,
        Leap forth from thy dark sheath again!"


I:moore20000829120
T:The Wine-Cup is Circling
U:Air - Michael Hoy
F:The wine-cup is circling in Almhin's hall

     THE wine-cup is circling in Almhin's hall,
     And its Chief, 'mid his heroes reclining,
     Looks up, with a sigh to the trophied wall,
        Where his sword hangs idly shining.
           When, hark, that shout
           From the vale without -
        "Arm ye quick, the Dane, the Dane is nigh!"
           Every Chief starts up
           From his foaming cup,
        And "To battle, to battle!" is the Finian's cry.

     The minstrels have seized their harps of gold,
     And they sing such thrilling numbers -
     'Tis like the voice of the Brave, of old,
        Breaking forth from their place of slumber!
           Spear to buckler rang,
           As the minstrels sang,
        And the Sun-burst o'er them floated wide;
           While remembering the yoke
           Which their fathers broke,
        "On for liberty, for liberty!" the Finians cried.

     Like clouds of the night the Northmen came,
        O'er the valley of Almhin lowering;
     While onward moved, in the light of its fame,
        That banner of Erin, towering.
           With the mingling shock
           Rung cliff and rock,
        While, rank on rank, the invaders die:
           And the shout, that last
           O'er the dying pass'd,
        Was "victory! victory!" - the Finian's cry.

I:moore20000829121
T:Oh, Could We Do With This World of Ours
U:Air - Basket of Oysters
F:Oh, could we do with this world of ours

     OH, could we do with this world of ours
     As thou dost with thy garden bowers,
     Reject the weeds and keep the flowers,
     What a heaven on earth we'd make it!
     So bright a dwelling should be our own,
     So warranted free from sigh or frown,
     That angels soon would be coming down,
          By the week or month to take it.

     Like those gay flies that wing through air,
     And in themselves a lustre bear,
     A stock of light, still ready there,
          Whenver they wish to use it;
     So in this world I'd make for thee,
     Our hearts should all like fire-flies be,
     And the flash of wit or poesy
          Break forth whenever we choose it.

     While every joy that glads our sphere
     Hath still some shadow hovering near,
     In this new world of ours, my dear,
          Such shadows will all be omitted; -
     Unless they're like that graceful one,
     Which when thou'rt dancing in the sun,
     Still near thee, leaves a charm upon
          Each spot where it hath flitted!

I:moore20000829122
T:From This Hour the Pledge is Given
U:Air - Renardine
F:From this hour the pledge is given

     FROM this hour the pledge is given,
        From this hour my soul is thine:
     Come what will, from earth of heaven,
        Weal or woe, thy fate be mine.
     When the proud and great stood by thee,
        None dared thy rights to spurn;
     And if now they're false and fly thee,
        Shall I, too, falsely turn?
     No; - whate'er the fire that try thee,
        In the same this heart shall burn.

     Though the sea, where thou embarkest,
        Offers now no friendly shore,
     Light may come where all looks darkest,
        Hope hath life, when life seems o'er.
     And of those past ages dreaming,
        When glory deck'd thy brow,
     Oft I fondly think, though seeming
        So fallen and clouded now,
     Thou'lt again break forth, all beaming -
        None so bright, so blest as thou!


I:moore20000829123
T:The Dream of Those Days
U:Air - I love you above all the rest
F:The dream of those days when first I sung thee is o'er

     THE dream of those days when first I sung thee is o'er
     Thy triumph hath stain'd the charm thy sorrows then wore;
     And even the light which Hope once shed o'er thy chains,
     Alas, not a gleam to grace thy freedom remains.

     Say, is it that slavery sunk so deep in thy heart,
     That still the dark brand is there, though chainless thou art;
     And Freedom's sweet fruit, for which thy spirit long burn'd,
     Now, reaching at last thy lip, to ashes hath turn'd?

     Up Liberty's steep by Truth and Eloquence led,
     With eyes on her temple fix'd, how proud was thy tread!
     Ah, better thou ne'er hadst lived that summit to gain,
     Denied in the porch, than thus dishonour the fane.


I:moore20000829124
T:Silence is in Our Festal Halls
U:Air - The green Woods of Truigha
F:Silence is in our festal halls 

     SILENCE is in our festal halls -
        Sweet son of song! thy course is o'er;
     In vain on thee sad Erin calls,
        Her minstrel's voice responds no more; -
     All silent as the Eolian shell
        Sleeps at the close of some bright day,
     When the sweet breeze, that waked its swell
        At sunny morn, hath died away.

     Yet, at our feasts, thy spirit long,
        Awaked by music's spell, shall rise;
     For, name so link'd with deathless song
        Partakes its charm and never dies;
     And even within the holy fane,
        When music wafts the soul to heaven,
     One thought to him, whose earliest strain
        Was echoed there, shall long be given.

     But where is now the cheerful day,
        The social night, when by thy side,
     He who now weaves this parting lay
        His skilless voice with thine allied;
     And sung those songs whose every tone,
        When bard and minstrel long have past,
     Shall still, in sweetness all their own,
        Embalm'd by fame, undying last.

     Yes, Erin, shine alone the fame -
        Or, if thy bard have shared the crown,
     From thee the borrow'd glory came,
        And at thy feet is now laid down.
     Enough, if Freedom still inspire,
        His latest song, and still there be,
     As evening closes round his lyre,
        One ray upon its chords from thee.

