I:lawrence2001060910
T:Bei Hennef
F:The little river twittering in the twilight

The little river twittering in the twilight,
The wan, wondering look of the pale sky,
       This is almost bliss.

And everything shut up and gone to sleep,
All the troubles and anxieties and pain
       Gone under the twilight.

Only the twilight now, and the soft "Sh!" of the river
       That will last for ever.

And at last I know my love for you is here;
I can see it all, it is whole like the twilight,
It is large, so large, I could not see it before,
Because of the little lights and flickers and interruptions,
       Troubles, anxieties and pains.

       You are the call and I am the answer,
       You are the wish, and I the fulfilment,
       You are the night, and I the day.
              What else? it is perfect enough.
              It is perfectly complete,
              You and I,
              What more ---?

Strange, how we suffer in spite of this!

                                                     <I>Hennef am Rhein.</I>

I:lawrence2001061001
T:On the Balcony
F:In front of the sombre mountains, a faint, lost ribbon of rainbow

In front of the sombre mountains, a faint, lost ribbon of rainbow;
And between us and it, the thunder;
And down below in the green wheat, the labourers
Stand like dark stumps, still in the green wheat. 

You are near to me, and your naked feet in their sandals,
And through the scent of the balcony's naked timber
I distinguish the scent of your hair: so now the limber
Lightning falls from heaven.

Adown the pale-green glacier river floats
A dark boat through the gloom - and whither?
The thunder roars. But still we have each other!
The naked lightnings in the heavens dither
And disappear - what have we but each other?
The boat has gone.

                                                     <I>Icking.</I>

I:lawrence2001060901
T:Mutilation
F:A thick mist-sheet lies over the broken wheat

A thick mist-sheet lies over the broken wheat.
I walk up to my neck in mist, holding my mouth up.
Across there, a discoloured moon burns itself out.

I hold the night in horror;
I dare not turn round.

To-night I have left her alone.
They would have it I have left her for ever.

Oh my God, how it aches
Where she is cut off from me!

Perhaps she will go back to England.
Perhaps she will go back,
Perhaps we are parted for ever.

If I go on walking through the whole breadth of Germany
I come to the North Sea, or the Baltic.

Over there is Russia - Austria, Switzerland, France, in a circle!
I here in the undermist on the Bavarian road.

It aches in me.
What is England or France, far off, 
But a name she might take?
I don't mind this continent stretching, the sea far away;
It aches in me for her
Like the agony of limbs cut off and aching;
Not even longing,
It is only agony.

A cripple!
Oh God, to be mutilated!
To be a cripple!

And if I never see her again?

I think, if they told me so
I could convulse the heavens with my horror.
I think I could alter the frame of things in my agony.
I think I could break the System with my heart.
I think, in my convulsion, the skies would break.

She too suffers.
But who could compel her, if she chose me against them all?
She has not chosen me finally, she suspends her choice.
Night folk, Tuatha De Danaan, dark Gods, govern her sleep,
Magnificent ghosts of the darkness, carry off her decision in sleep,
Leave her no choice, make her lapse me-ward, make her,
Oh Gods of the living Darkness, powers of Night.

                                                     <I>Wolfratshausen.</I>

I:lawrence2001060902
T:Gloire de Dijon
F:When she rises in the morning 

When she rises in the morning 
I linger to watch her; 
She spreads the bath-cloth underneath the window 
And the sunbeams catch her 
Glistening white on the shoulders, 
While down her sides the mellow 
Golden shadow glows as 
She stoops to the sponge, and her swung breasts 
Sway like full-blown yellow
Gloire de Dijon roses.

She drips herself with water, and her shoulders 
Glisten as silver, they crumble up 
Like wet and falling roses, and I listen 
For the sluicing of their rain-dishevelled petals. 
In the window full of sunlight 
Concentrates her golden shadow 
Fold on fold, until it glows as 
Mellow as the glory roses. 

                                                     <I>Icking.</I>

I:lawrence2001060903
T:Rose of All the World
F:I am here myself; as though this heave of effort

I am here myself; as though this heave of effort
At starting other life, fulfilled my own:
Rose-leaves that whirl in colour round a core
Of seed-specks kindled lately and softly blown

By all the blood of the rose-bush into being -
Strange, that the urgent will in me, to set 
My mouth on hers in kisses, and so softly
To bring together two strange sparks, beget

Another life from our lives, so should send
The innermost fire of my own dim soul out-spinning
And whirling in blossom of flame and being upon me!
That my completion of manhood should be the beginning

Another life from mine! For so it looks.
The seed is purpose, blossom accident.
The seed is all in all, the blossom lent
To crown the triumph of this new descent.

Is that it, woman? Does it strike you so?
The Great Breath blowing a tiny seed of fire
Fans out your petals for excess of flame,
Till all your being smokes with fine desire?

Or are we kindled, you and I, to be
One rose of wonderment upon the tree
Of perfect life, and is our possible seed
But the residuum of the ecstasy?

How will you have it? - the rose is all in all,
Or the ripe rose-fruits of the luscious fall?
The sharp begetting, or the child begot?
Our consummation matters, or does it not?

To me it seems the seed is just left over
>From the red rose-flowers' fiery transience;
Just orts and slarts; berries that smoulder in the bush
Which burnt just now with marvellous immanence.

Blossom, my darling, blossom, be a rose
Of roses unchidden and purposeless; a rose
For rosiness only, without an ulterior motive;
For me it is more than enough if the flower unclose.

I:lawrence2001060904
T:Meeting Among the Mountains
F:The little pansies by the road have turned 

The little pansies by the road have turned 
Away their purple faces and their gold, 
And evening has taken all the bees from the thyme, 
And all the scent is shed away by the cold. 

Against the hard and pale blue evening sky 
The mountain's new-dropped summer snow is clear 
Glistening in steadfast stillness: like transcendent 
Clean pain sending on us a chill down here. 

Christ on the Cross! - his beautiful young man's body 
Has fallen dead upon the nails, and hangs 
White and loose at last, with all the pain 
Drawn on his mouth, eyes broken at last by his pangs. 

And slowly down the mountain road, belated, 
A bullock wagon comes; so I am ashamed 
To gaze any more at the Christ, whom the mountain snows 
Whitely confront; I wait on the grass, am lamed. 

The breath of the bullock stains the hard, chill air, 
The band is across its brow, and it scarcely seems 
To draw the load, so still and slow it moves, 
While the driver on the shaft sits crouched in dreams. 

Surely about his sunburnt face is something 
That vexes me with wonder. He sits so still 
Here among all this silence, crouching forward, 
Dreaming and letting the bullock take its will. 

I stand aside on the grass to let them go; 
- And Christ, I have met his accusing eyes again, 
The brown eyes black with misery and hate, that look 
Full in my own, and the torment starts again. 

One moment the hate leaps at me standing there, 
One moment I see the stillness of agony, 
Something frozen in the silence that dare not be 
Loosed, one moment the darkness frightens me. 

Then among the averted pansies, beneath the high 
White peaks of snow, at the foot of the sunken Christ 
I stand in a chill of anguish, trying to say 
The joy I bought was not too highly priced. 

But he has gone, motionless, hating me, 
Living as the mountains do, because they are strong, 
With a pale, dead Christ on the crucifix of his heart, 
And breathing the frozen memory of his wrong. 

Still in his nostrils the frozen breath of despair, 
And heart like a cross that bears dead agony 
Of naked love, clenched in his fists the shame, 
And in his belly the smouldering hate of me. 

And I, as I stand in the cold, averted flowers, 
Feel the shame-wounds in his hands pierce through my own, 
And breathe despair that turns my lungs to stone 
And know the dead Christ weighing on my bone. 

I:lawrence2001061101
T:Everlasting Flowers
U:For a Dead Mother
F:Who do you think stands watching

Who do you think stands watching   
       The snow-tops shining rosy   
In heaven, now that the darkness   
       Takes all but the tallest posy?   
   
Who then sees the two-winged   
       Boat down there, all alone   
And asleep on the snow's last shadow,   
       Like a moth on a stone?   
   
The olive-leaves, light as gad-flies,   
       Have all gone dark, gone black.  
And now in the dark my soul to you   
       Turns back.   
   
To you, my little darling,   
       To you, out of Italy.   
For what is loveliness, my love,   
       Save you have it with me!   
   
So, there's an oxen wagon   
       Comes darkly into sight:   
A man with a lantern, swinging   
       A little light.   
   
What does he see, my darling   
       Here by the darkened lake?   
Here, in the sloping shadow   
       The mountains make?   
   
He says not a word, but passes,    
       Staring at what he sees.   
What ghost of us both do you think he saw   
       Under the olive trees?   
   
All the things that are lovely -   
       The things you never knew -    
I wanted to gather them one by one   
       And bring them to you.   
   
But never now, my darling,   
       Can I gather the mountain-tips   
>From the twilight like half-shut lilies   
       To hold to your lips.   
   
And never the two-winged vessel   
       That sleeps below on the lake   
Can I catch like a moth between my hands   
       For you to take.   
   
But hush, I am not regretting:   
       It is far more perfect now.   
I'll whisper the ghostly truth to you   
       And tell them how   
   
I know you here in the darkness,   
       How you sit in the throne of my eyes   
At peace, and look out of the windows   
       In glad surprise. 

                                                     <I>Lago de Garda.</I>

I:lawrence2001060905
T:Giorno dei Morti
F:Along the avenue of cypresses

Along the avenue of cypresses, 
All in their scarlet cloaks and surplices 
Of linen, go the chanting choristers, 
The priests in gold and black, the villagers. . . . 

And all along the path to the cemetery
The round dark heads of men crowd silently,
And black-scarved faces of womenfolk, wistfully 
Watch at the banner of death, and the mystery. 

And at the foot of a grave a father stands 
With sunken head, and forgotten, folded hands; 
And at the foot of a grave a mother kneels 
With pale shut face, nor either hears nor feels 

The coming of the chanting choristers 
Between the avenue of cypresses, 
The silence of the many villagers, 
The candle-flames beside the surplices. 

I:lawrence2001061102
T:Coming Awake
F:When I woke, the lake-lights were quivering on the wall

When I woke, the lake-lights were quivering on the wall,   
       The sunshine swam in a shoal across and across,   
And a hairy, big bee hung over the primulas   
       In the window, his body black fur, and the sound of him cross.   
   
There was something I ought to remember: and yet      
       I did not remember. Why should I? The running lights   
And the airy primulas, oblivious   
       Of the impending bee - they were fair enough sights.

I:lawrence2001061103
T:Song of a Man Who is Loved
F:Between her breasts is my home, between her breasts 

Between her breasts is my home, between her breasts.
Three sides set on me space and fear, but the fourth side rests
Sure and a tower of strength, 'twixt the walls of her breasts.

Having known the world so long, I have never confessed
How it impresses me, how hard and compressed
Rocks seem, and earth, and air uneasy, and waters still ebbing west.

All things on the move, going their own little ways, and all
Jostling, people touching and talking and making small
Contacts and bouncing off again, bounce! bounce like a ball!

My flesh is weary with bounce and gone again! -
My eyes are weary with words that bounce on them, and then
Bounce off again, meaning nothing. Assertions! Assertions! stones, women and men!

Between her breasts is my home, between her breasts. 
Three sides set on me chaos and bounce, but the fourth side rests
Sure on a haven of peace, between the mounds of her breasts.

I am that I am, and no more than that: but so much
I am, nor will I be bounced out of it. So at last I touch
All that I am-not in softness, sweet softness, for she is such.

And the chaos that bounces and rattles like shrapnel, at least
Has for me a door into peace, warm dawn in the east
Where her bosom softens towards me, and the turmoil has ceased.

So I hope I shall spend eternity
With my face down buried between her breasts;
And my still heart full of security,
And my still hands full of her breasts.

I:lawrence2001060906
T:Song of a Man Who Has Come Through
F:Not I, not I, but the wind that blows through me! 

Not I, not I, but the wind that blows through me! 
A fine wind is blowing the new direction of Time. 
If only I let it bear me, carry me, if only it carry me! 
If only I am sensitive, subtle, oh, delicate, a winged gift! 
If only, most lovely of all, I yield myself and am borrowed 
By the fine, fine wind that takes its course through the chaos of the world 
Like a fine, an exquisite chisel, a wedge-blade inserted; 
If only I am keen and hard like the sheer tip of a wedge 
Driven by invisible blows, 
The rock will split, we shall come at the wonder, we shall find the Hesperides. 

Oh, for the wonder that bubbles into my soul, 
I would be a good fountain, a good well-head, 
Would blur no whisper, spoil no expression. 

What is the knocking? 
What is the knocking at the door in the night? 
It is somebody wants to do us harm. 

No, no, it is the three strange angels. 
Admit them, admit them 

I:lawrence2001060907
T:People
F:The great gold apples of night

The great gold apples of night
Hang from the street's long bough
              Dripping their light
On the faces that drift below,
On the faces that drift and blow
Down the night-time, out of sight
              In the wind's sad sough.

The ripeness of these apples of night
Distilling over me
              Makes sickening the white
Ghost-flux of faces that hie
Them endlessly, endlessly by
Without meaning or reason why
              They ever should be.

I:lawrence2001060908
T:Craving for Spring
F:I wish it were spring in the world

I wish it were spring in the world. 

Let it be spring! 
Come, bubbling, surging tide of sap! 
Come, rush of creation! 
Come, life! surge through this mass of mortification! 
Come, sweep away these exquisite, ghastly first-flowers, 
which are rather last-flowers! 
Come, thaw down their cool portentousness, dissolve them: 
snowdrops, straight, death-veined exhalations of white and purple crocuses, 
flowers of the penumbra, issue of corruption, nourished in mortification, 
jets of exquisite finality; 
Come, spring, make havoc of them! 

I trample on the snowdrops, it gives me pleasure to tread down the jonquils, 
to destroy the chill Lent lilies; 
for I am sick of them, their faint-bloodedness, 
slow-blooded, icy-fleshed, portentous. 

I want the fine, kindling wine-sap of spring, 
gold, and of inconceivably fine, quintessential brightness, 
rare almost as beams, yet overwhelmingly potent, 
strong like the greatest force of world-balancing. 

This is the same that picks up the harvest of wheat 
and rocks it, tons of grain, on the ripening wind; 
the same that dangles the globe-shaped pleiads of fruit 
temptingly in mid-air, between a playful thumb and finger; 
oh, and suddenly, from out of nowhere, whirls the pear-bloom, 
upon us, and apple- and almond- and apricot- and quince-blossom , 
storms and cumulus clouds of all imaginable blossom 
about our bewildered faces, 
though we do not worship. 

I wish it were spring 
cunningly blowing on the fallen sparks, odds and ends of the old, scattered fire, 
and kindling shapely little conflagrations 
curious long-legged foals, and wide-eared calves, and naked sparrow-bubs. 

I wish that spring 
would start the thundering traffic of feet 
new feet on the earth, beating with impatience. 

I wish it were spring, thundering 
delicate, tender spring. 
I wish these brittle, frost-lovely flowers of passionate, mysterious corruption 
were not yet to come still more from the still-flickering discontent. 

Oh, in the spring, the bluebell bows him down for very exuberance, 
exulting with secret warm excess, 
bowed down with his inner magnificence! 

Oh, yes, the gush of spring is strong enough 
to toss the globe of earth like a ball on a water-jet 
dancing sportfully; 
as you see a tiny celluloid ball tossing on a squirt of water 
for men to shoot at, penny-a-time, in a booth at a fair. 

The gush of spring is strong enough 
to play with the globe of earth like a ball on a fountain; 
At the same time it opens the tiny hands of the hazel 
with such infinite patience. 
The power of the rising, golden, all-creative sap could take the earth 
and heave it off among the stars, into the invisible; 
the same sets the throstle at sunset on a bough 
singing against the blackbird; 
comes out in the hesitating tremor of the primrose, 
and betrays its candour in the round white strawberry flower, 
is dignified in the foxglove, like a Red-Indian brave. 

Ah come, come quickly, spring! 
come and lift us towards our culmination, we myriads; 
we who have never flowered, like patient cactuses. 
Come and lift us to our end, to blossom, bring us to our summer, 
we who are winter-weary in the winter of the of the world. 
Come making the chaffinch nests hollow and cosy, 
come and soften the willow buds till they are puffed and furred, 
then blow them over with gold. 
Coma and cajole the gawky colt's-foot flowers. 

Come quickly, and vindicate us
against too much death. 
Come quickly, and stir the rotten globe of the world from within, 
burst it with germination, with world anew. 
Come now, to us, your adherents, who cannot flower from the ice. 
All the world gleams with the lilies of Death the Unconquerable, 
but come, give us our turn. 
Enough of the virgins and lilies, of passionate, suffocating perfume of corruption, 
no more narcissus perfume, lily harlots, the blades of sensation 
piercing the flesh to blossom of death. 
Have done, have done with this shuddering, delicious business 
of thrilling ruin in the flesh, of pungent passion, of rare, death-edged ecstasy . 
Give us our turn, give us a chance, let our hour strike, 
O soon, soon! 
Let the darkness turn violet with rich dawn. 
Let the darkness be warmed, warmed through to a ruddy violet, 
incipient purpling towards summer in the world of the heart of man. 

Are the violets already here! 
Show me! I tremble so much to hear it, that even now 
on the threshold of spring, I fear I shall die. 
Show me the violets that are out. 

Oh, if it be true, and the living darkness of the blood of man is purpling with violets, 
if the violets are coming out from under the rack of men, winter-rotten and fallen, 
we shall have spring. 
Pray not to die on this Pisgah blossoming with violets. 
Pray to live through. 
If you catch a whiff of violets from the darkness of the shadow of man 
it will be spring in the world, 
it will be spring in the world of the living; 
wonderment organising itself, heralding itself with the violets, 
stirring of new seasons. 

Ah, do not let me die on the brink of such anticipation! 
Worse, let me not deceive myself. 

                                                     <I>Zennor.</I>

I:lawrence2001061104
T:Cypresses
F:Tuscan cypresses

Tuscan cypresses,
What is it?

Folded in like a dark thought
For which the language is lost,
Tuscan cypresses,
Is there a great secret?
Are our words no good?

The undeliverable secret,
Dead with a dead race and a dead speech, and yet
Darkly monumental in you,
Etruscan cypresses.

Ah, how I admire your fidelity,
Dark cypresses!

Is it the secret of the long-nosed Etruscans?
The long-nosed, sensitive-footed, subtly-smiling Etruscans,
Who made so little noise outside the cypress groves?

Among the sinuous, flame-tall cypresses
That swayed their length of darkness all around
Etruscan-dusky, wavering men of old Etruria:
Naked except for fanciful long shoes,
Going with insidious, half-smiling quietness
And some of Africa's imperturbable sang-froid
About a forgotten business.

What business, then?
Nay, tongues are dead, and words are hollow as seed-pods,
Having shed their sound and finished all their echoing
Etruscan syllables,
That had the telling.

Yet more I see you darkly concentrate,
Tuscan cypresses,
On one old thought:
On one old slim imperishable thought, while you remain
Etruscan cypresses;
Dusky, slim marrow-thought of slender, flickering men of Etruria,
Whom Rome called vicious.

Vicious, dark cypresses:
Vicious, you supple, brooding, softly-swaying pillars of dark flame.
Monumental to a dead, dead race
Embowered in you!

Were they then vicious, the slender, tender-footed
Long-nosed men of Etruria?
Or was their way only evasive and different, dark, like cypress-trees in a wind?

They are dead, with all their vices,
And all that is left
Is the shadowy monomania of some cypresses
And tombs.

The smile, the subtle Etruscan smile still lurking
Within the tombs,
Etruscan cypresses.
He laughs longest who laughs last;
Nay, Leonardo only bungled the pure Etruscan smile.

What would I not give
To bring back the rare and orchid-like
Evil-yclept Etruscan?
For as to the evil
We have only Roman word for it,
Which I, being a little weary of Roman virtue,
Don't hang much weight on.

For oh, I know, in the dust where we have buried
The silenced races and all their abominations,
We have buried so much of the delicate magic of life.

There in the deeps
That churn the frankincense and ooze the myrrh,
Cypress shadowy,
Such an aroma of lost human life!

The say the fit survive,
But I invoke the spirits of the lost.
Those that have not survived, the darkly lost,
To bring their meaning back into life again,
Which they have taken away
And wrapt inviolable in soft cypress-trees,
Etruscan cypresses.

Evil, what is evil?
There is only one evil, to deny life
As Rome denied Etruria
And mechanical America Montezuma still.

                                                     <I>Fiesole.</I>

I:lawrence2001060909
T:Snake
F:A snake came to my water-trough 

A snake came to my water-trough 
On a hot, hot day, and I in pyjamas for the heat, 
To drink there. 

In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great dark carob-tree 
I came down the steps with my pitcher 
And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at the trough before me. 

He reached down from a fissure in the earth-wall in the gloom 
And trailed his yellow-brown slackness soft-bellied down, over the edge of the stone trough 
And rested his throat upon the stone bottom, 
And where the water had dripped from the tap, in a small clearness, 
He sipped with his straight mouth, 
Softly drank through his straight gums, into his slack long body, 
Silently. 

Someone was before me at my water-trough, 
And I, like a second comer, waiting. 

He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do, 
And looked at me vaguely, as drinking cattle do, 
And flickered his two-forked tongue from his lips, and mused a moment, 
And stooped and drank a little more, 
Being earth-brown, earth-golden from the burning bowels of the earth 
On the day of Sicilian July, with Etna smoking. 

The voice of my education said to me 
He must be killed,
For in Sicily the black, black snakes are innocent, the gold are venomous. 

And voices in me said, If you were a man 
You would take a stick and break him now, and finish him off. 

But must I confess how I liked him, 
How glad I was he had come like a guest in quiet, to drink at my water-trough 
And depart peaceful, pacified, and thankless, 
Into the burning bowels of this earth? 

Was it cowardice, that I dared not kill him? 
Was it perversity, that I longed to talk to him? 
Was it humility, to feel so honoured? 
I felt so honoured. 

And yet those voices: 
<I>If you were not afraid, you would kill him!</I> 

And truly I was afraid, I was most afraid, 
But even so, honoured still more 
That he should seek my hospitality 
>From out the dark door of the secret earth. 

He drank enough 
And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken, 
And flickered his tongue like a forked night on the air, so black, 
Seeming to lick his lips, 
And looked around like a god, unseeing, into the air, 
And slowly turned his head, 
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice adream, 
Proceeded to draw his slow length curving round 
And climb again the broken bank of my wall-face. 

And as he put his head into that dreadful hole, 
And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders, and entered farther, 
A sort of horror, a sort of protest against his withdrawing into that horrid black hole, 
Deliberately going into the blackness, and slowly drawing himself after, 
Overcame me now his back was turned. 

I looked round, I put down my pitcher, 
I picked up a clumsy log 
And threw it at the water-trough with a clatter. 

I think it did not hit him, 
But suddenly that part of him that was left behind convulsed in undignified haste, 
Writhed like lightning, and was gone 
Into the black hole, the earth-lipped fissure in the wall-front, 
At which, in the intense still noon, I stared with fascination. 

And immediately I regretted it. 
I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act! 
I despised myself and the voices of my accursed human education. 

And I thought of the albatross, 
And I wished he would come back, my snake. 

For he seemed to me again like a king, 
Like a king in exile, uncrowned in the underworld, 
Now due to be crowned again. 

And so, I missed my chance with one of the lords 
Of life. 
And I have something to expiate: 
A pettiness. 

                                                     <I>Taormina.</I>

I:lawrence2001061002
T:Baby Tortoise 
F:You know what it is to be born alone

You know what it is to be born alone,
Baby tortoise!

The first day to heave your feet little by little from the shell,
Not yet awake,
And remain lapsed on earth, 
Not quite alive.

A tiny, fragile, half-animate bean.

To open your tiny beak-mouth, that looks as if it would never open,
Like some iron door;
To lift the upper hawk-beak from the lower base
And reach your skinny neck
And take your first bite at some dim bit of herbage,
Alone, small insect,
Tiny bright-eye,
Slow one.

To take your first solitary bite
And move on your slow, solitary hunt.
Your bright, dark little eye, 
Your eye of a dark disturbed night,
Under its slow lid, tiny baby tortoise,
So indomitable.

No one ever heard you complain.

You draw your head forward, slowly, from your little wimple
And set forward, slow-dragging, on your four-pinned toes,
Rowing slowly forward.
Whither away, small bird?
Rather like a baby working its limbs, 
Except that you make slow, ageless progress
And a baby makes none.

The touch of sun excites you,
And the long ages, and the lingering chill
Make you pause to yawn,
Opening your impervious mouth,
Suddenly beak-shaped, and very wide, like some suddenly gaping pincers;
Soft red tongue, and hard thin gums,
Then close the wedge of your little mountain front,
Your face, baby tortoise.

Do you wonder at the world, as slowly you turn your head in its wimple
And look with laconic, black eyes?
Or is sleep coming over you again,
The non-life?

You are so hard to wake.

Are you able to wonder? 
Or is it just your indomitable will and pride of the first life
Looking round
And slowly pitching itself against the inertia
Which had seemed invincible?

The vast inanimate,
And the fine brilliance of your so tiny eye,
Challenger.

Nay, tiny shell-bird.
What a huge vast inanimate it is, that you must row against,
What an incalculable inertia.

Challenger,
Little Ulysses, fore-runner,
No bigger than my thumb-nail,
Buon viaggio.

All animate creation on your shoulder,
Set forth, little Titan, under your battle-shield.
The ponderous, preponderate,
Inanimate universe;
And you are slowly moving, pioneer, you alone.

How vivid your travelling seems now, in the troubled sunshine,
Stoic, Ulyssean atom;
Suddenly hasty, reckless, on high toes.

Voiceless little bird,
Resting your head half out of your wimple
In the slow dignity of your eternal pause.
Alone, with no sense of being alone, 
And hence six times more solitary;
Fulfilled of the slow passion of pitching through immemorial ages
Your little round house in the midst of chaos.

Over the garden earth,
Small bird,
Over the edge of all things.

Traveller,
With your tail tucked a little on one side
Like a gentleman in a long-skirted coat.

All life carried on your shoulder,
Invincible fore-runner.

I:lawrence2001060911
T:Tortoise Shell
F:The Cross, the Cross 

The Cross, the Cross 
Goes deeper in than we know,
Deeper into life;
Right into the marrow
And through the bone.

Along the back of the baby tortoise
The scales are locked in an arch like a bridge,
Scale-lapping, like a lobster's sections
Or a bee's.

Then crossways down his sides
Tiger-stripes and wasp-bands.

Five, and five again,
And round the edges twenty-five little ones,
The sections of the baby tortoise shell.

Four, and a keystone;
Four, and a keystone;
Four, and a keystone;
Then twenty-four, and a tiny little keystone.

It needed Pythagoras to see life playing with counters on the living back
Of the baby tortoise;
Life establishing the first eternal mathematical tablet,
Not in stone, like the Judean Lord, or bronze, but in life-clouded, life-rosy tortoise shell.

The first little mathematical gentleman
Stepping, wee mite, in his loose trousers
Under all the eternal dome of the mathematical law.

Fives, and tens,
Threes and fours and twelves,
All the <I>volte face</I> of decimals,
The whirligig of dozens and the pinnacle of seven.

Turn him on his back,
The kicking little beetle.
And there again, on his shell-tender, earth-touching belly,
The long cleavage of division, upright of the eternal cross
And on either side count five,
On each side, two above, on each side, two below
The dark bar horizontal.

The Cross!
It goes right through him, the sprottling insect,
Through his cross-wise cloven psyche,
Through his five-fold complex-nature.

So turn him over on his toes again;
Four pin-point toes, and a problematical thumb-piece,
Four rowing limbs, and one wedge-balancing head,
Four and one makes five, which is the clue to all mathematics.

The Lord wrote it down on the little slate
Of the baby tortoise.
Outward and visible indication of the plan within,
The complex, manifold involvedness of an individual creature
Plotted out
On this small bird, this rudiment,
This little dome, this pediment
Of all creation,
This slow one.