I:lawrence2001061619
T:Unhappy Souls
F:The unhappy souls are those that can't die and become silent

The unhappy souls are those that can't die and become silent
but must ever struggle on to assert themselves.

I:lawrence2001061620
T:Full Life
F:A man can't fully live unless he dies and ceases to care

A man can't fully live unless he dies and ceases to care,
ceases to care.

I:lawrence2001061621
T:Non-Existence
F:We don't exist unless we are deeply and sensually in touch

We don't exist unless we are deeply and sensually in touch
with that which can be touched but not known.

I:lawrence2001061622
T:All-Knowing
F:All that we know is nothing, we are merely crammed waste-paper baskets

All that we know is nothing, we are merely crammed waste-paper baskets
unless we are in touch with that which laughs at all our knowing.

I:lawrence2001061623
T:Lucifer
F:Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell

Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
But tell me, tell me, how do you know
that he lost any of his brightness in falling?
He only fell out of your ken, you orthodox angels,
you dull angels, tarnished with centuries of conventionality.

I:lawrence2001061624
T:The Mills of God
F:Why seek to alter people, why not leave them alone?

Why seek to alter people, why not leave them alone?
The mills of God will grind them small, anyhow, there is no escape.
The heavens are the nether mill-stone, and our heavy earth
rolls round and round, grinding exceeding small.

I:lawrence2001061625
T:Fatality
F:No one, not even God, can put back a leaf on to a tree

No one, not even God, can put back a leaf on to a tree
once it has fallen off.

And no one, not God nor Christ nor any other
can put back a human life into connection with the living cosmos
once the connection has been broken
and the person has become finally self-centred.

Death alone, through the long processes of disintegration
can melt the detached life back
through the dark Hades at the roots of the tree
into the circulating sap, once more, of the tree of life.

I:lawrence2001061626
T:Men and Women
F:All this talk of equality between the sexes is merely an expression of sex-hate

All this talk of equality between the sexes is merely an expression of sex-hate.
Men and women should learn tenderness to each other
and to leave one another alone.

I:lawrence2001061627
T:En Masse
F:Today, society has sanctified

Today, society has sanctified
the sin against the Holy Ghost,
and all are encouraged into the sin
so that all may be lost together, <I>en masse</I>, the great word of our civilisation.

I:lawrence2001061628
T:God and the Holy Ghost
F:There is no sinning against God, what does God care about sin! 

There is no sinning against God, what does God care about sin! 
But there is sinning against the Holy Ghost, since the Holy Ghost is with us 
in the flesh, is part of our consciousness. 

The Holy Ghost is the deepest part of our own consciousness 
wherein we know ourselves for what we are 
and know our dependence on the creative beyond. 

So if we go counter to our own deepest consciousness 
naturally we destroy the most essential self in us, 
and once done, there is no remedy, no salvation for this, 
nonentity is our portion. 

I:lawrence2001061629a
T:The Triumph of the Machine
F:They talk of the triumph of the machine

They talk of the triumph of the machine,
but the machine will never triumph.

Out of the thousands and thousands of centuries of man
the unrolling of ferns, white tongues of the acanthus lapping at the sun,
for one sad century
machines have triumphed, rolled us hither and thither,
shaking the lark's nest till the eggs have broken.

Shaken the marshes, till the geese have gone
and the wild swans flown away singing the swan-song at us.

Hard, hard on the earth the machines are rolling,
but through some hearts they will never roll.

The lark nests in his heart
and the white swan swims in the marshes of his loins,
and through the wide prairies of his breast a young bull herds his cows,
lambs frisk among the daisies of his brain.

And at last
all these creatures that cannot die, driven back
into the uttermost corners of the soul,
will send up the wild cry of despair.

The thrilling lark in a wild despair will trill down arrows from the sky,
the swan will beat the waters in rage, white rage of an enraged swan,
even the lambs will stretch forth their necks like serpents,
like snakes of hate, against the man in the machine:
even the shaking white poplar will dazzle like splinters of glass against him.

And against this inward revolt of the native creatures of the soul
mechanical man, in triumph seated upon the seat of his machine
will be powerless, for no engine can reach into the marshes and depths of a man.

So mechanical man in triumph seated upon the seat of his machine
will be driven mad from within himself, and sightless, and on that day
the machines will turn to run into one another
traffic will tangle up in a long-drawn-out crash of collision
and engines will rush at the solid houses, the edifice of our life
will rock in the shock of the mad machine, and the house will come down.

Then, far beyond the ruin, in the far, in the ultimate, remote places
the swan will lift up again his flattened, smitten head
and look round, and rise, and on the great vaults of his wings
will sweep round and up to greet the sun with a silky glitter of a new day
and the lark will follow trilling, angerless again,
and the lambs will bite off the heads of the daisies for very friskiness.
But over the middle of the earth will be the smoky ruin of iron
the triumph of the machine.

I:lawrence2001061629
T:Dark Satanic Mills
F:The dark, satanic mills of Blake

The dark, satanic mills of Blake
how much more darker and more satanic they are now!
But oh, the streams that stream white-faced, in and out,
in and out when the hooter hoots, white-faced, with a dreadful gush
of multitudinous ignominy,
what shall we think of these?
They are millions to my one!

They are millions to my one! But oh
what have they done to you, white-faced millions
mewed and mangled in the mills of man?
What have they done to you, what have they done to you,
what is this awful aspect of man?

Oh Jesus, didn't you see, when you talked of service
this would be the result!
When you said: Retro me, Satanas!
this is what you gave him leave to do
behind your back!

And now, the iron has entered into the soul
and the machine has entangled the brain, and got it fast,
and steel has twisted the loins of man, electricity has exploded the heart
and out of the lips of people jerk strange mechanical noises in place of speech.

What is man, that thou art no longer mindful of him?
and the son of man, that thou pitiest him not?
Are these no longer men, these millions, millions?
What are they then?

I:lawrence2001061630
T:What Have They Done to You?
F:What have they done to you, men of the masses, creeping back and forth to work?

What have they done to you, men of the masses, creeping back and forth to work?

What have they done to you, the saviours of the people, oh what have they saved you from, while they pocketed the money?

Alas, they have saved you from yourself, from your own frail dangers
and devoured you with the machine, the vast maw of iron.

They saved you from your squalid cottages and poverty of hand to much
and embedded you in workmen's dwellings, where your wage is the dole of work, and the dole is your wage of nullity.

They took away, oh they took away your man's native instincts and intuitions
and gave you a board-school education, newspapers, and the cinema.

They stole your body from you, and left you an animated carcass
to work with, and nothing else:
unless goggling eyes, to goggle at the film
and a board-school brain, stuffed up with the ha'penny press.

Your instincts gone, your intuitions gone, your passions dead
Oh carcass with a board-school mind and a ha'penny newspaper intelligence,
what have they done to you, what have they done to you, Oh what have they done to you?

Oh look at my fellow-men, oh look at them 
the masses! Oh, what has been done to them?

I:lawrence2001061631
T:What Is a Man to Do?
F:Oh, when the world is hopeless

Oh, when the world is hopeless
what is a man to do?

When the vast, vast masses of men have been caught by the machine
into the industrial dance of the living death, the jigging of wage-paid work,
and fed on condition they dance this dance of corpses driven by steam.

When year by year, year in, year out, in millions, in increasing millions
they dance, dance, dance this dry industrial jig of the corpses entangled in iron
and there's no escape, for the iron goes through their genitals, brains, and souls

then what is a man to do?

For mankind is a single corpus, we are all one flesh
even with the industrial masses, and the greedy middle mass.

Is it hopeless, hopeless, hopeless?
has the iron got them fast?
are their hearts the hub of the wheel?
the millions, millions of my fellow-men!

Then must a single man die with them, in the clutch of iron?
Or must he try to amputate himself from the iron-entangled body of mankind
and risk bleeding to death, but perhaps escape into some unpopular place
and leave the fearful Laocoön of his fellow-man entangled in iron
to its fearful fate.

I:lawrence2001061632
T:The Cross
F:Behold your Cross, Christians!

Behold your Cross, Christians!
With the upright division into sex
men on this side, women on that side
without any division into inferiority and superiority
only difference,
divided in the mystic, tangible and intangible difference.

And then, truth much more bitter to accept,
the horizontal division of mankind
into that which is below the level, and that which is above....

That which is truly man, and that which is robot,
the ego-bound.

On this cross of division, division into sex
division into slave and freeman
Christ, the human consciousness
was crucified
to set all men free
to make all men noble
to wipe away the mystic barriers of sex.

In vain, in vain, in vain, oh vastly in vain
this horrific crucifixion.

Now risen Man and risen lord
risen from the dead, after his crucifixion
must learn the supreme lesson -

That sex is an eternal upright division, before which we must bow
and live in acceptance of it,
it can never be wiped out;
the gods that made us greater than our consciousness
and we, we are mostly unexplored hinterland
and our consciousness is a spot of light in a great but living darkness.

And then, risen, we must learn the most cruel lesson
of the horizontal division of mankind
the eternal division between the base and the beautiful.
The base, those that are below the bar of the cross
the small-ones, ego-bound, little machines running in an enclosed circle of self
the inferiors.

The inferiors, the inferiors, there they are, in hordes.
And they will destroy all, unless they are made to submit
and to serve that which is flamey or pure and watery or swift wind or sound ringing rock
that which is elemental and of the substantial gods in man.
Mankind is lost and lost forever
unless men swiftly divide again, and the base are thrust down
into service, like the roots of trees.

For today, the base, the robots sit on thrones of the world
in all the high places, and they are masters of industry
and rulers of millions of robots, being robots themselves, the same
only the brainy sort:
But brainy robot, or aesthetic robot, or merely muscular or mechanical robot
it is all the same
less than real men, inferiors, inferiors.

How then are the few men, men of the wind and rain
men of the fire and rock, how are they going to come forth
from the robot mass of rich and poor, mechanical ego-bound myriads?

Life will find a way.
Life always finds a way.
Only, Oh man, stare, stare into the gulf
between you and the robot-hordes, misnamed your fellow-men.

I:lawrence2001061633
T:Man and Machine
F:Man invented the machine

Man invented the machine
and now the machine has invented man.

God the Father is a dynamo
and God the Son a talking radio
and God the Holy Ghost is gas that keeps it all going.

And men have perforce to be little dynamos
and little talking radios
and the human spirit is so much gas, to keep it all going.

Man invented the machine
and now the machine has invented man.

I:lawrence2001061634
T:Trees in the Garden 
F:Ah in the thunder air

Ah in the thunder air
how still the trees are!

And the lime-tree, lovely and tall, every leaf silent
hardly looses even a last breath of perfume.

And the ghostly, creamy coloured little tree of leaves
white, ivory white among the rambling greens
how evanescent, variegated elder, she hesitates on the green grass
as if, in another moment, she would disappear
with all her grace of foam!

And the larch that is only a column, it goes up too tall to see:
and the balsam-pines that are blue with the grey-blue blueness of things from the sea,
and the young copper beech, its leaves red-rosy at the ends
how still they are together, they stand so still
in the thunder air, all strangers to one another
as the green grass glows upwards, strangers in the silent garden.

                                                     <I>Lichtental</I>
						     
						     
I:lawrence2001061635
T:Revolutions as Such!
F:Curiously enough, actual revolutions are made by robots

Curiously enough, actual revolutions are made by robots,
living people never make revolutions,
they can't, life means too much to them.

I:lawrence2001061636
T:Robot Feelings 
F:It is curious, too, that though the modern man in the street 

It is curious, too, that though the modern man in the street 
is a robot, and incapable of love 
he is capable of an endless, grinding, nihilistic hate: 
that is the only strong feeling he is capable of; 
and therein lies the danger of robot-democracy and all the men in the street, 
they move in a great grind of hate, slowly but inevitably.

I:lawrence2001061637
T:Worship
F:All men are worshippers 

All men are worshippers 
unless they have fallen, and become robots.

All men worship the wonder of life
until they collapse into egoism, the mechanical, self-centred system of the robot.

But even in pristine men, there is this difference:
some men can see life clear and flickering all around,
and some can only see what they are shown.

Some men look straight into the eyes of the gods
and some men can see no gods, they only know
the gods are there because of the gleam on the faces of the men who see.

Most men, even unfallen, can only live
by the transmitted gleam from the faces of vivider men
who look into the eyes of the gods.

And worship is the joy of the gleam from the eyes of the gods,
and the robot is the denial of the same,
even the denial that there <I>is</I> any gleam.

I:lawrence2001061638
T:There are No Gods
F:There are no gods, and you can please yourself 

There are no gods, and you can please yourself 
have a game of tennis, go out in the car, do some shopping, sit and talk, talk, talk
with a cigarette browning your fingers.

There are no gods, and you can please yourself -
go and please yourself -

But leave me alone, leave me alone, to myself!
and then in the room, whose is the presence
that makes the air so still and lovely to me?

Who is it that softly touches the sides of my breast
and touches me over the heart
so that my heart beats soothed, soothed, soothed and at peace?

Who is it smooths the bed-sheets like the cool
smooth ocean where the fishes rest on edge
in their own dream?

Who is it that clasps and kneads my naked feet, till they unfold,
till all is well, till all is utterly well? the lotus-lilies of the feet!

I tell you, it is no woman, it is no man, for I am alone.
And I fall asleep with the gods, the gods
that are not, or that are
according to the soul's desire,
like a pool into which we plunge, or do not plunge.

I:lawrence2001061639
T:Nothing to Save 
F:There is nothing to save, now all is lost

There is nothing to save, now all is lost,
but a tiny core of stillness in the heart
like the eye of a violet.

I:lawrence2001061640
T:Tourists
F:There is nothing to look at any more

There is nothing to look at any more,
everything has been seen to death.

I:lawrence2001061641
T:Search for Love
F:Those that go searching for love
 
Those that go searching for love
only make manifest their own lovelessness,

and the loveless never find love,
only the loving find love,
and they never have to seek for it. 

I:lawrence2001061642
T:Search for Truth
F:Search for nothing any more, nothing

Search for nothing any more, nothing
except truth.
Be very still, and try and get at the truth.

And the first question to ask yourself is:
How great a liar am I? 

I:lawrence2001061643
T:Bourgeois and Bolshevist
F:The bourgeois produces the bolshevist, inevitably

The bourgeois produces the bolshevist, inevitably
as every half-truth at length produces the contradiction of itself
in the opposite half.truth.

I:lawrence2001061644
T:Minorities in Danger 
F:Now above all is the time for the minorities of men

Now above all is the time for the minorities of men, 
those who are neither bourgeois nor bolshevist, but true to life, 
to gather and fortify themselves, in every class, in every country, in every race. 

Instead of which, the minorities that still see the gleam of life 
submit abjectly to the blind mechanical traffic-streams of those horrors 
the stone-blind bourgeois, and the stone-blind bolshevist, 
and pander to them.

I:lawrence2001061645
T:If You are a Man
F:If you are a man, and believe in the destiny of mankind 

If you are a man, and believe in the destiny of mankind 
then say to yourself: we will cease to care 
about property and money and mechanical devices, 
and open our consciousness to the deep, mysterious life 
that we are now cut off from. 

The machine shall be abolished from the earth again; 
it is a mistake that mankind has made; 
money shall cease to be, and property shall cease to perplex 
and we will find the way to immediate contact with life 
and with one another. 

To know the moon as we have never known 
yet she is knowable. 
To know a man as we have never known 
a man, as never yet a man was knowable, yet still shall be. 

I:lawrence2001061646
T:Terra Incognita
F:There are vast realms of consciousness still undreamed of 

There are vast realms of consciousness still undreamed of 
vast ranges of experience, like the humming of unseen harps, 
we know nothing of, within us. 
Oh when man has escaped from the barbed-wire entanglement 
of his own ideas and his own mechanical devices 
there is a marvellous rich world of contact and sheer fluid beauty 
and fearless face-to-face awareness of now-naked life 
and me, and you, and other men and women 
and grapes, and ghouls, and ghosts and green moonlight 
and ruddy-orange limbs stirring the limbo 
of the unknown air, and eyes so soft 
softer than the space between the stars, 
and all things, and nothing, and being and not-being 
alternately palpitant, 
when at last we escape the barbed-wire enclosure 
of <I>Know Thyself</I>, knowing we can never know, 
we can but touch, and wonder, and ponder, and make our effort 
and dangle in a last fastidious fine delight 
as the fuchsia does, dangling her reckless drop 
of purple after so much putting forth 
and slow mounting marvel of a little tree. 

I:lawrence2001061647
T:Thought 
F:Thought, I love thought

Thought, I love thought. 
But not the jiggling and twisting of already existent ideas 
I despise that self-important game. 
Thought is the welling up of unknown life into consciousness, 
Thought is the testing of statements on the touchstone of the conscience, 
Thought is gazing on to the face of life, and reading what can be read, 
Thought is pondering over experience, and coming to a conclusion. 
Thought is not a trick, or an exercise, or a set of dodges, 
Thought is a man in his wholeness wholly attending.

I:lawrence2001061648
T:The Gods
F:The gods are all things, and so are we

The gods are all things, and so are we.
The gods are only ourselves, as we are in our moments of pure manifestation.

I:lawrence2001061649
T:Be it So
F:O, if a flame is in you, be it so!

O, if a flame is in you, be it so!
When your flame flickers up, and you flicker forth in sheer purity
for a moment pure from all conceit of yourself, and all afterthought
you are for that moment one of the gods, Jesus or Fafnir or Priapus or Siva.

I:lawrence2001061650
T:The Old Idea of Sacrifice
F:The old idea of sacrifice was this

The old idea of sacrifice was this:
that blood of the lower life must be shed
for the feeding and strengthening of the handsomer, fuller life.

O when the old world sacrificed a ram
it was to the gods who make us splendid
and it was for a feast, a feast of meat, for men and maids
on a day of splendour, for the further splendour of being men.

It was the eating up of little lives,
even doves, even small birds
into the dance and splendour of a bigger life.

There is no such thing as sin.
There is only life and anti-life.

And sacrifice is the law of life which enacts
that little lives must be eaten up into the dance and splendour
of bigger lives, with due reverence and acknowledgement.

I:lawrence2001061651
T:The White Horse 
F:The youth walks up to the white horse, to put its halter on

The youth walks up to the white horse, to put its halter on
and the horse looks at him in silence.
They are so silent, they are in another world.

I:lawrence2001061652
T:Prayer
F:Give me the moon at my feet

Give me the moon at my feet.
Put my feet upon the crescent, like a Lord!
O let my ankles be bathed in moonlight, that I may go
sure and moon-shod, cool and bright-footed
towards my goal.

For the sun is hostile, now
his face is like the red lion.

